# Hebrew Language Sources
# 16 articles via Wikipedia API

## [Hebrew language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hebrew_language)

Hebrew is a Northwest Semitic language within the Afroasiatic language family. A regional dialect of the Canaanite languages, it was natively spoken by the Israelites and remained in regular use as a first language until after 200 CE and as the liturgical language of Judaism (since the Second Temple period) and Samaritanism. The language was revived as a spoken language in the 19th century, and is the only successful large-scale example of linguistic revival. It is the only Canaanite language still spoken today. It is also one of the only two Northwest Semitic languages with contemporary speakers, the other being Aramaic.  
The earliest examples of written Paleo-Hebrew date to the 10th century BCE. Nearly all of the Hebrew Bible is written in Biblical Hebrew, with much of its present form in the dialect that scholars believe flourished around the 6th century BCE, during the time of the Babylonian captivity. For this reason, Hebrew has been referred to by Jews as Lashon Hakodesh (לְשׁוֹן הַקֹּדֶש, lit. 'the holy tongue'  or 'the tongue [of] holiness') since ancient times. The language was not referred to by the name Hebrew in the Bible, but as Yehudit (transl. 'Judean') or Səpaṯ Kəna'an (transl. "the language of Canaan"). Mishnah Gittin 9:8 refers to the language as Ivrit, meaning Hebrew; however, Mishnah Megillah refers to the language as Ashurit, meaning Assyrian, which is derived from the name of the alphabet used, in contrast to Ivrit, meaning the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet.
Hebrew ceased to be a regular spoken language sometime between 200 and 400 CE, as it declined in the aftermath of the unsuccessful Bar Kokhba revolt, which was carried out against the Roman Empire by the Jews of Judaea. Aramaic and, to a lesser extent, Greek were already in use as international languages, especially among societal elites and immigrants. Hebrew survived into the medieval period as the language of Jewish liturgy, rabbinic literature, intra-Jewish commerce, and Jewish poetic literature. The first dated book printed in Hebrew was published by Abraham Garton in Reggio (Calabria, Italy) in 1475. With the rise of Zionism in the 19th century, the Hebrew language experienced a full-scale revival as a spoken and literary language. The creation of a modern version of the ancient language was led by Eliezer Ben-Yehuda. Modern Hebrew (Ivrit) became the main language of the Yishuv in Palestine, and subsequently the official language of the State of Israel.
Estimates of worldwide usage include five million speakers in 1998, and over nine million people in 2013. After Israel, the United States has the largest Hebrew-speaking population, with approximately 220,000 fluent speakers (see Israeli Americans and Jewish Americans). Pre-revival forms of Hebrew are used for prayer or study in Jewish and Samaritan communities around the world today; the latter group utilizes the Samaritan dialect as their liturgical tongue. As a non-first language, it is studied mostly by non-Israeli Jews and students in Israel, by archaeologists and linguists specializing in the Middle East and its civilizations, and by theologians in Christian seminaries.

---

## [Revival of the Hebrew language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Revival_of_the_Hebrew_language)

The revival of the Hebrew language took place in Europe and the Southern Levant toward the end of the 19th century and into the 20th century, through which the language's usage changed from the purely sacred language of Judaism to a spoken and written language used for daily life among the Jews in Palestine, and later Israel. Eliezer Ben-Yehuda is often regarded as the "reviver of the Hebrew language" having been the first to raise the concept of reviving Hebrew and initiating a project known as the Ben-Yehuda Dictionary. The revitalization of Hebrew was then ultimately brought about by its usage in Jewish settlement in Ottoman Palestine that arrived in the waves of migration known as the First Aliyah and the Second Aliyah. In Mandatory Palestine, Modern Hebrew became one of three official languages and after the Israeli Declaration of Independence in 1948, one of two official languages of Israel, along with Modern Arabic. In July 2018, a new law made Hebrew the sole national language of the State of Israel, while giving Arabic a "special status".
More than purely a linguistic process, the revival of Hebrew was utilized by Jewish modernization and political movements, leading many people to change their names and becoming a tenet of the ideology associated with aliyah, renaming of the land, Zionism and Israeli policy.
The process of Hebrew's return to regular usage is unique; there are no other examples of a natural language without any native speakers subsequently acquiring several million native speakers, and no other examples of a sacred language becoming a national language with millions of native speakers.
The language's revival eventually brought linguistic additions with it. While the initial leaders of the process insisted they were only continuing "from the place where Hebrew's vitality was ended", what was created represented a broader basis of language acceptance; it includes characteristics derived from all periods of Hebrew language, as well as from the non-Hebrew languages used by the long-established European, North African, and Middle Eastern Jewish communities, with Yiddish being predominant.

---

## [Eliezer Ben-Yehuda](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eliezer_Ben-Yehuda)

Eliezer Ben‑Yehuda (born Eliezer Yitzhak Perlman; 7 January 1858 – 16 December 1922) was a Russian–Jewish linguist, lexicographer, and journalist who immigrated to Jerusalem in 1881, when the Ottoman Empire ruled it. He is renowned as the lexicographer of the first Hebrew dictionary and also as the editor of Jerusalem-based HaZvi, one of the first Hebrew newspapers published in Mandatory Palestine. Ben-Yehuda was the primary driving force behind the revival of the Hebrew language.

---

## [Biblical Hebrew](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biblical_Hebrew)

Biblical Hebrew (Hebrew: עִבְרִית מִקְרָאִית, romanized: ʿiḇrîṯ miqrāʾîṯ  or לְשׁוֹן הַמִּקְרָא, ləšôn ha-miqrāʾ ), also called Classical Hebrew, is an archaic form of the Hebrew language, a language in the Canaanitic branch of the Semitic languages spoken by the Israelites in the area known as the Land of Israel, roughly west of the Jordan River and east of the Mediterranean Sea. The term ʿiḇrîṯ 'Hebrew' was not used as the language in the Hebrew Bible, which was referred to as שְֹפַת כְּנַעַן śəp̄aṯ kənaʿan  'language of Canaan' or יְהוּדִית Yəhûḏîṯ 'Judean', but was used in Koine Greek and Mishnaic Hebrew texts. 
Paleo-Hebrew is attested in inscriptions from about the 10th century BCE, when it was almost identical to Phoenician and other Canaanite languages, and spoken Hebrew persisted as a first language through and beyond the Second Temple period, which ended in 70 CE with the siege of Jerusalem. It eventually developed into Mishnaic Hebrew, which was employed as a second language until the 5th century.
The language of the Hebrew Bible reflects various stages of the Hebrew language in its consonantal skeleton, as well as the Tiberian vocalization system added in the Middle Ages by the Masoretes. There is evidence of regional dialectal variation, including differences between the northern Kingdom of Israel and the southern Kingdom of Judah. The consonantal text, called the Masoretic Text ("𝕸"), was transmitted in manuscript form and underwent redaction and modernization in the Second Temple period, but its earliest portions (parts of Amos, Isaiah, Hosea and Micah) can be dated to the late 8th to early 7th centuries BCE.
Biblical Hebrew has several different writing systems. From around the 12th century BCE until the 6th century BCE, writers employed the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet. This system was retained by the Samaritans, who use a descendant, the Samaritan script, to this day. However, the Imperial Aramaic alphabet gradually displaced the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet after the Babylonian captivity, and became the source for the current Hebrew alphabet. These scripts lack letters to represent all of the sounds of Biblical Hebrew, although these sounds are reflected in Greek and Latin transcriptions/translations of the time. They initially indicated only consonants, but certain letters, known by the Latin term matres lectionis, became increasingly used to mark vowels. In the Middle Ages, various systems of diacritics were developed to mark the vowels in Hebrew manuscripts; of these, only the Tiberian vocalization is still widely used.
Biblical Hebrew possessed a series of emphatic consonants whose precise articulation (pronunciation) is disputed, likely ejective or possibly pharyngealized. Earlier Biblical Hebrew had three consonants that were not distinguished in the writing system and later merged with other consonants. The stop consonants developed fricative allophones under the influence of Aramaic, and these sounds (the "begadkefat consonants") eventually became marginally phonemic. The pharyngeal and glottal consonants underwent weakening in some regional dialects, as reflected, for example, in the modern Samaritan Hebrew reading tradition. The vowel system of Hebrew underwent changes over time and is reflected differently in Koine Greek and Latin transcriptions, medieval vocalization systems, and modern reading traditions. 
Premodern Hebrew had a typically Semitic nonconcatenative morphology, arranging roots into patterns to form words. Biblical Hebrew distinguished two grammatical genders (masculine and feminine), and three numbers (singular, plural, and the uncommon dual). Verbs were marked for voice and mood, and had two conjugations that may have indicated aspect or tense. The tense or aspect of verbs was also influenced by the conjunction ו, the "waw-consecutive" construction. The default word order for Biblical Hebrew was verb–subject–object (unlike Modern Hebrew), and verbs were inflected for the number, gender, and per

---

## [Hebrew alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hebrew_alphabet)

The Hebrew alphabet (Hebrew: אָלֶף־בֵּית עִבְרִי,[a] Alefbet ivri), known variously by scholars as the Ktav Ashuri, Jewish script, square script and block script, is a unicameral abjad script used in the writing of the Hebrew language. Alphabets based on the Hebrew script are used to write other Jewish languages, most notably Yiddish, Ladino, Judeo-Arabic, and Judeo-Persian. In modern Hebrew, vowels are increasingly introduced. The Hebrew script is used informally in Israel to write Levantine Arabic, especially among Druze. The script is an offshoot of the Imperial Aramaic alphabet, which flourished during the Achaemenid Empire, and which itself derives from the Phoenician alphabet.
Historically, a different abjad script was used to write Hebrew: the original, old Hebrew script, now known as the Paleo-Hebrew alphabet, has been largely preserved in a variant form as the Samaritan alphabet, and is still used by the Samaritans. The present Jewish script or square script, on the contrary, is a stylized form of the Aramaic alphabet and was technically known by Jewish sages as Ashurit (lit. 'Assyrian script'), since its origins were known to be from Assyria (Mesopotamia).
Various styles (in current terms, fonts) of representation of the Jewish script letters described in this article also exist, including a variety of cursive Hebrew styles. In the remainder of this article, the term Hebrew alphabet refers to the square script unless otherwise indicated.
The Hebrew alphabet has 22 letters. It does not have case. Five letters have different forms when used at the end of a word. Hebrew is written from right to left. Originally, the alphabet was an abjad consisting only of consonants, but is now considered an impure abjad. As with other abjads, such as the Arabic alphabet, during its centuries-long use scribes devised means of indicating vowel sounds by separate vowel points, known in Hebrew as niqqud. In both biblical and rabbinic Hebrew, the letters י ו ה א can also function as matres lectionis, which is when certain consonants are used to indicate vowels. There is a trend in Modern Hebrew towards the use of matres lectionis to indicate vowels that have traditionally gone unwritten, a practice known as full spelling.
The  Yiddish alphabet, a modified version of the Hebrew alphabet used to write Yiddish, is a true alphabet, with all vowels rendered in the spelling, except in the case of inherited Hebrew words, which typically retain their Hebrew consonant-only spellings.
The Arabic and Hebrew alphabets have similarities in acrophony because it is said that they are both derived from the Aramaic alphabet, which in turn derives from the Phoenician alphabet, both being slight regional variations of the Proto-Canaanite alphabet used in ancient times to write the various Canaanite languages (including Hebrew, Moabite, Phoenician, Punic, et cetera).

---

## [Paleo-Hebrew alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paleo-Hebrew_alphabet)

The Paleo-Hebrew script (Hebrew: הכתב העברי הקדום), (𐤐𐤋𐤀𐤉 𐤏𐤁𐤓𐤉), also Palaeo-Hebrew, Proto-Hebrew or Old Hebrew, is the writing system found in Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions, including pre-Biblical and Biblical Hebrew, from southern Canaan, also known as the biblical kingdoms of Israel (Samaria) and Judah. It is considered to be the script used to record the original texts of the Bible. Due to its similarity to the Samaritan script, the Talmud states that the Samaritans still used this script. The Talmud described it as the "Livonaʾa script" (Jewish Babylonian Aramaic: לִיבּוֹנָאָה, romanized: Lībōnāʾā), translated by some as "Lebanon script". It has also been suggested that the name is a corrupted form (with the letters nun and lamed accidentally swapped) of "Neapolitan", i.e. of Nablus. Use of the term "Paleo-Hebrew alphabet" for the script follows the suggestion by Solomon Birnbaum, who in 1954 argued that "[t]o apply the term Phoenician [from Northern Canaan, today's Lebanon] to the script of the Hebrews [from Southern Canaan, today's Israel-Palestine] is hardly suitable". The Paleo-Hebrew and Phoenician alphabets are two slight regional variants of the same script. 
The first Paleo-Hebrew inscription identified in modern times was the Royal Steward inscription (KAI 191), found in 1870,  and described at the time as "two large ancient Hebrew inscriptions in Phoenician letters". Fewer than 2,000 inscriptions are known today, of which the vast majority comprise just a single letter or word. The earliest known examples of Paleo-Hebrew writing date to the 10th century BCE.
Like the Phoenician alphabet, it is a slight regional variant and an immediate continuation of the Proto-Canaanite alphabet, a regional form of the Proto-Sinaitic script which was used throughout Canaan in the Late Bronze Age. Phoenician, Hebrew, and all of their sister Canaanite languages were largely indistinguishable dialects before that time. The Paleo-Hebrew script is an abjad of 22 consonantal letters, exactly as the other Canaanite scripts from the period.
By the 5th century BCE, among Judeans the alphabet had been mostly replaced by the Aramaic alphabet as used officially by the Achaemenid Empire. The "square" variant now known simply as the Hebrew alphabet evolved directly out of this by about the 3rd century BCE, although some letter shapes did not become standard until the 1st century CE . By contrast, the Samaritan script is an immediate continuation of the Proto-Hebrew script without intermediate non-Israelite evolutionary stages . There is also some continued use of the Paleo-Hebrew script in Jewish religious contexts down to the 1st century BCE, notably in the Paleo-Hebrew Leviticus Scroll found in the Dead Sea Scrolls.



---

## [Modern Hebrew](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_Hebrew)

Modern Hebrew (endonym: עִבְרִית חֲדָשָׁה, romanized: 'Ivrit ḥadasha, IPA: [ivˈʁit χadaˈʃa] or [ʕivˈrit ħadaˈʃa]), also known as Israeli Hebrew or simply Hebrew, is the standard form of the Hebrew language spoken today. It is the only extant Canaanite language of the Semitic language family, as well as one of the oldest attested languages to be spoken as a first language in the modern day, on account of Hebrew being attested since the 2nd millennium BC. It uses the Hebrew Alphabet, an abjad script written from right-to-left. The current standard was codified as part of the revival of Hebrew in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, and now serves as the official and national language of the State of Israel, where it is predominantly spoken by its over 10 million people. Thus, Modern Hebrew is nearly universally regarded as the most successful instance of language revitalization in history.
A Northwest Semitic language within the Afroasiatic language family, Hebrew was spoken since antiquity as the vernacular of the Israelites until around the 3rd century BCE, when it was supplanted by a western dialect of the Aramaic language, the local or dominant languages of the regions Jews migrated to, and later Judeo-Arabic, Judaeo-Spanish, Yiddish, and other Jewish languages. Although Hebrew continued to be used for Jewish liturgy, poetry and literature, and written correspondence, it became extinct as a spoken language.
By the late 19th century, Russian-Jewish linguist Eliezer Ben-Yehuda (formerly Eliezer Yitzhak Perelman) had begun a popular movement to revive Hebrew as an everyday language, motivated by his desire to preserve Hebrew literature and establish a distinct Jewish nationality and nationalism in the context of Zionism. Soon after, a large number of Yiddish and Judaeo-Spanish speakers were murdered in the Holocaust or fled to Israel, and many speakers of Judeo-Arabic emigrated to Israel in the Jewish exodus from the Muslim world, where many would adapt to Modern Hebrew.
Currently, Hebrew is spoken by over 10 million people, counting native, fluent, and non-fluent speakers. Over 6.5 million of these speak it as their native language, the overwhelming majority of whom are Jews who were born in Israel. The rest is split: 2 million are immigrants to Israel; 1.5 million are Israeli Arabs, whose first language is usually Arabic; and half a million are expatriate Israelis or diaspora Jews.
Under Israeli law, the organization that officially directs the development of Modern Hebrew is the Academy of the Hebrew Language, headquartered at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem.

---

## [Modern Hebrew verbs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Modern_Hebrew_verbs)

In Hebrew, verbs, which take the form of derived stems, are conjugated to reflect their tense and mood, as well as to agree with their subjects in gender, number, and person. Each verb has an inherent voice, though a verb in one voice typically has counterparts in other voices. This article deals mostly with Modern Hebrew, but to some extent, the information shown here applies to Biblical Hebrew as well.

---

## [Dead Sea Scrolls](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dead_Sea_Scrolls)

The Dead Sea Scrolls (DSS), in the narrow sense identical with the Qumran Caves Scrolls, are a set of ancient Jewish manuscripts from the Second Temple period. They were discovered over a period of ten years, between 1946 and 1956, at the Qumran Caves near Ein Feshkha in the West Bank, on the northern shore of the Dead Sea. Dating from the 3rd century BCE to the 1st century CE, the Dead Sea Scrolls include the oldest surviving manuscripts of entire books later included in the various Jewish and Christian biblical canons, including  deuterocanonical manuscripts from late Second Temple Judaism, as well as extrabiblical books. As such, they cast new light on the emergence of Rabbinic Judaism and of Christianity, and their relationship with Jewish religious traditions. In the wider sense, the Dead Sea Scrolls also include similar findings from elsewhere in the Judaean Desert, and are sometimes called Judaean Desert scrolls. Some of the scrolls found outside Qumran are from later centuries. Almost all of the 15,000 scrolls and scroll fragments are held in the Shrine of the Book at the Israel Museum in Jerusalem.
The Israeli government's custody of the Dead Sea Scrolls is disputed by Jordan and the Palestinian Authority on territorial, legal, and humanitarian grounds—they were mostly discovered following the Jordanian annexation of the West Bank and were acquired by Israel after Jordan lost the 1967 Arab–Israeli War—whilst Israel's claims are primarily based on historical and religious grounds, given their significance in Jewish history and in the heritage of Judaism.
Many thousands of written fragments have been discovered in the Dead Sea area – most have been published, together with the details of their discovery, in the 40-volume Discoveries in the Judaean Desert. They represent the remnants of larger manuscripts damaged by natural causes or through human interference, with the vast majority holding only small scraps of text. However, a small number of well-preserved and nearly intact manuscripts have survived—fewer than a dozen among those from the Qumran Caves. Researchers have assembled a collection of 981 different manuscripts (discovered in 1946/1947 and in 1956) from 11 caves, which lie in the immediate vicinity of the Hellenistic Jewish settlement at the site of Khirbet Qumran in the eastern Judaean Desert in the West Bank. The caves are located about 1.5 kilometres (1 mi) west of the northwestern shore of the Dead Sea, whence the scrolls derive their name. Archaeologists have long associated the scrolls with the ancient Jewish sect known as the Essenes, although some recent interpretations have challenged this connection and argue that priests in Jerusalem or other unknown Jewish groups wrote the scrolls.
Most of the manuscripts are written in Hebrew, with some written in Aramaic (for example the Son of God Text, in different regional dialects, including Nabataean) and a few in Greek. Other discoveries from the Judaean Desert add Latin (from Masada), and some later Arabic manuscripts from the 7th-8th centuries CE (from Khirbet al-Mird). Most of the texts are written on parchment, some on papyrus, and one on copper. Though scholarly consensus dates the Dead Sea Scrolls to between the 3rd century BCE and the 1st century CE, there are Arabic manuscripts from associated Judaean Desert sites that are dated between the 8th and 10th century CE. Bronze coins found at the same sites form a series beginning with John Hyrcanus, a ruler of Hasmonean Judea (in office 135–104 BCE), and continuing until the period of the First Jewish–Roman War (66–73 CE), supporting the paleography and radiocarbon dating of the scrolls.
Owing to the poor condition of some of the scrolls, scholars have not identified all of their texts. The identified texts fall into three general groups:

About 40% are copies of texts from the canonical Hebrew scriptures.
Approximately 30% are texts from the Second Temple period that ultimately were not canonized in th

---

## [Hebrew literature](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hebrew_literature)

Hebrew literature consists of ancient, medieval, and modern writings in the Hebrew language.  It is one of the primary forms of Jewish literature, though there have been cases of literature written in Hebrew by non-Jews, mostly among the Arab citizens of Israel. Hebrew literature was produced in many different parts of the world throughout the medieval and modern eras, while contemporary Hebrew literature is largely Israeli literature.
In 1966, Agnon won the Nobel Prize for Literature for novels and short stories that employ a unique blend of biblical, Talmudic and modern Hebrew, making him the first Hebrew writer to receive this award.
There have been many bibliographies recording Hebrew books and authors, one of the most comprehensive being The Bibliography of the Hebrew Book 1473-1960, a bibliography of all printed Hebrew books published before 1960 which lists some 12,000 authors and 9000 titles.

---

## [Hebrew numerals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hebrew_numerals)

The system of Hebrew numerals is a quasi-decimal alphabetic numeral system using the letters of the Hebrew alphabet.
The system was adapted from that of the Greek numerals sometime between 200 and 78 BCE, the latter being the date of the earliest archeological evidence.
The current numeral system is also known as the Hebrew alphabetic numerals to contrast with earlier systems of writing numerals used in classical antiquity. These systems were inherited from usage in the Aramaic and Phoenician scripts, attested from c. 800 BCE in the Samaria Ostraca.
The Greek system was adopted in Hellenistic Judaism and had been in use in Greece since about the 5th century BCE.
In this system, there is no notation for zero, and the numeric values for individual letters are added together.  Each unit (1–9) is assigned a separate letter, each tens (10–90) a separate letter, and the first four hundreds (100, 200, 300, 400) a separate letter. The later hundreds (500, 600, 700, 800 and 900) are represented by the sum of two or three letters representing the first four hundreds. To represent numbers from 1,000 to 999,999, the same letters are reused to serve as thousands, tens of thousands, and hundreds of thousands. Gematria, a type of Jewish numerology, uses these transformations extensively.
In Israel today, the decimal system of Hindu–Arabic numeral system, such as 0, 1, 2, 3, etc., is used in almost all cases, such as money, age, date on the civil calendar.  The Hebrew numerals are used only in special cases, such as when using the Hebrew calendar, or numbering a list, similar to a, b, c, d, etc., much as Roman numerals are used in the West.

---

## [Abjad numerals](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Abjad_numerals)

The Abjad numerals, also called Hisab al-Jummal (Arabic: حِسَاب ٱلْجُمَّل, ḥisāb al-jummal), are a decimal alphabetic numeral system/alphanumeric code, in which the 28 letters of the Arabic alphabet are assigned numerical values. They have been used in the Arabic-speaking world since before the eighth century when positional Arabic numerals were adopted. In modern Arabic, the word ʾabjadīyah (أَبْجَدِيَّة) means 'alphabet' in general.
In the Abjad system, the first letter of the Arabic alphabet, ʾalif, is used to represent 1; the second letter, bāʾ, 2, up to 9. Letters then represent the first nine intervals of 10s and those of the 100s: yāʾ for 10, kāf for 20, qāf for 100, ending with 1000.
The word ʾabjad (أبجد) itself derives from the first four letters (A-B-G-D) of the Semitic alphabet, including the Aramaic alphabet, Hebrew alphabet, Phoenician alphabet, and other scripts for Semitic languages. These alphabets contained only 22 letters, stopping at taw, numerically equivalent to 400. The Arabic Abjad system continues at this point with letters not found in other alphabets: thāʾ = 500, khāʾ = 600, dhāl = 700, etc. Abjad numerals in Arabic are similar to the alphanumeric codes of Hebrew gematria and Greek isopsephy.

---

## [Canaanite languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Canaanite_languages)

The Canaanite languages, sometimes referred to as Canaanite dialects, are one of four subgroups of the Northwest Semitic languages of Western Asia. The others are the still spoken Aramaic and the now-extinct Ugaritic and Amorite languages. These closely related languages originated in the Levant and Upper Mesopotamia. Ancient Semitic-speaking peoples spoke them in an area encompassing what is today Israel, Palestine, Jordan, the Sinai Peninsula, Lebanon, Syria, as well as some areas of southwestern Turkey, Iraq, and the northwestern corner of Saudi Arabia. From the 9th century BCE, they also spread to the Iberian Peninsula, Malta, Sicily and North Africa in the form of Phoenician.
The historical Canaanites are broadly defined to include the Hebrews (Israelites, Samaritans and Judeans), Ammonites, Edomites, Ekronites, Hyksos, Phoenicians (including the Punics/Carthaginians), Moabites,  and sometimes the ethno-linguistically closely related Ugarites and Amorites.
The Canaanite languages continued to be spoken languages until at least the 5th century CE but were gradually supplanted by Aramaic, a language which gained influence as the lingua franca of the Neo-Assyrian Empire and succeeding Neo-Babylonian and Achaemenid Empires, as well as a number of other states such as the Palmyrene Empire.
Modern Hebrew is the only living Canaanite language today and was revived in the 19th century by political and cultural activists as an everyday spoken language in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. This was achieved mainly through the revitalization and cultivation efforts of Zionists throughout Europe and in Palestine. By the mid-20th century, Modern Hebrew had become the primary language of Palestinian Jews and was later made the official language of the State of Israel.
Many Jews used Mishnaic Hebrew well into the Middle Ages and up to the present day as both a liturgical and literary language, and they also employed it as a lingua franca for commerce between disparate diasporic communities. Samaritan Hebrew remained a liturgical language among Samaritans.

---

## [Northwest Semitic languages](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Northwest_Semitic_languages)

Northwest Semitic is a division of the Semitic languages comprising indigenous languages of the Levant. It emerged from Proto-Semitic in the Early Bronze Age. It is first attested in proper names identified as Amorite in the Middle Bronze Age. The oldest coherent texts are in Ugaritic, dating to the Late Bronze Age, which by the time of the Bronze Age collapse are joined by Old Aramaic, and by the Iron Age by Sutean and the Canaanite languages (Hebrew, Phoenician–Punic, Edomite and Moabite).
The term was coined by Carl Brockelmann in 1908, who separated Fritz Hommel's 1883 classification of Semitic languages into Northwest (Canaanite and Aramaic), East Semitic (Akkadian, its Assyrian and Babylonian dialects, Eblaite) and Southwest (Arabic, Old South Arabian languages and Abyssinian).
Brockelmann's Canaanite sub-group includes Ugaritic, Phoenician and Hebrew. Some scholars now regard Ugaritic either as belonging to a separate branch of Northwest Semitic (alongside Canaanite) or a dialect of Amorite.
Central Semitic is a proposed intermediate group comprising Northwest Semitic and Arabic.
Central Semitic is either a subgroup of West Semitic or a top-level division of Semitic alongside East Semitic and South Semitic. SIL Ethnologue in its system of classification (of living languages only) eliminates Northwest Semitic entirely by joining Canaanite and Arabic in a "South-Central" group which together with Aramaic forms Central Semitic. South Gileadite and Samalian have been identified as language varieties falling outside Aramaic proper but with some similarities to it, possibly in an "Aramoid" or "Syrian" subgroup.
It is clear that the Taymanitic script expressed a distinct linguistic variety that is not Arabic and not closely related to Hismaic or Safaitic, while it can tentatively be suggested that it was more closely related to Northwest Semitic.

---

## [Phoenician alphabet](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoenician_alphabet)

The Phoenician alphabet is an abjad (consonantal alphabet)  that was used across the Mediterranean civilization of Phoenicia for most of the 1st millennium BC. It was one of the first alphabets, attested in Canaanite and Aramaic inscriptions found across the Mediterranean basin. In the history of writing systems, the Phoenician script also marked the first to have a fixed writing direction—while previous systems were multi-directional, Phoenician was written horizontally, from right to left. It developed directly from the Proto-Sinaitic script used during the Late Bronze Age, which was derived in turn from Egyptian hieroglyphs.
The Phoenician alphabet was used to write Canaanite languages spoken during the Early Iron Age, sub-categorized by historians as Phoenician, Hebrew, Moabite, Ammonite and Edomite. It was widely disseminated outside of the Canaanite sphere by Phoenician merchants across the Mediterranean, where it was adopted and adapted by other cultures. The Phoenician alphabet proper was used in Ancient Carthage until the 2nd century BC, where it was used to write the Punic language. Its direct descendant scripts include the Aramaic and Samaritan alphabets, several Alphabets of Asia Minor, and the Archaic Greek alphabets.
The Phoenician alphabet proper uses 22 consonant letters—as an abjad used to write a Semitic language, it leaves vowel sounds implicit—though late varieties sometimes used matres lectionis to denote some vowels. As its letters were originally incised using a stylus, their forms are mostly angular and straight, though cursive forms increased in use over time, culminating in the Neo-Punic alphabet used in Roman North Africa.

---

## [Phoenician language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Phoenician_language)

Phoenician ( fə-NEE-shən; Phoenician: śpt knʿn 𐤔𐤐𐤕𐤟𐤊𐤍𐤏𐤍 lit. 'language of Canaan') is an extinct Canaanite language of the Semitic language family originally spoken in the region surrounding the cities of Tyre and Sidon. Extensive Tyro-Sidonian trade and commercial dominance led to Phoenician becoming a lingua franca of the maritime Mediterranean during the Iron Age. The Phoenician alphabet spread to Greece during this period, where it became the source of all modern European scripts.
Phoenician belongs to the Canaanite languages and as such is quite similar to Biblical Hebrew and other languages of the group, at least in its early stages, and is therefore mutually intelligible with them.
The area in which Phoenician was spoken, which the Phoenicians called Pūt, includes the northern Levant, specifically the areas now including Lebanon, the Western Galilee, parts of Cyprus, some parts of Syria, some adjacent areas of Anatolia, and, at least as a prestige language, the rest of Anatolia. Phoenician was also spoken in the Phoenician colonies along the coasts of the southwestern Mediterranean Sea, including those of modern Tunisia, Morocco, Libya and Algeria as well as Malta, the west of Sicily, southwest Sardinia, the Balearic Islands and southernmost Spain. It developed into the Punic language in North Africa.
In modern times, the language was first decoded by Jean-Jacques Barthélemy in 1758, who noted that the name "Phoenician" was first given to the language by Samuel Bochart in his Geographia Sacra seu Phaleg et Canaan.

---



---

# Hebrew Language Sources (Batch 2)
# 2 articles

## lingualinx: https://www.lingualinx.com/blog/hebrew-five-facts

5 Fascinating Facts About Hebrew Solutions Services Translation Localization Interpretation By Industry Educational Government &amp; Non-Profit Healthcare Legal Banking &amp; Finance Travel &amp; Tourism Manufacturing &amp; Engineering Retail &amp; Consumer Goods By Use Case eLearning Defense Health Insurance Software Human Resources Marketing Technology Connectors Our Platform Artificial Intelligence Resources News and Updates Case Studies Translation Calculator Data Security About Team Careers Contact Client Login Menu Solutions Services Translation Machine Translation Hybrid Translation Multimedia ISO Certified Translation ITAR Translation Localization Transcreation Website Interpretation OTP In-Person VRI ASL By Industry Educational Government &amp; Non-Profit Healthcare Legal Banking &amp; Finance Travel &amp; Tourism Manufacturing &amp; Engineering Retail &amp; Consumer Goods By Use Case eLearning Defense Health Insurance Software Human Resources Marketing Languages Technology Connectors Our Platform Artificial Intelligence Resources News and Updates Case Studies Translation Calculator Data Security About Team Careers Linguist Certification Program Work with LinguaLinx Contact Client Login News and Updates Browse Topics More Language Translation Services Translation World Languages Language Service Provider Localization interpretation Website Translation Services Translation Guides Culture Machine Translation AI Translations International Business Guides News VRI Healthcare government Legal Services eLearning transcreation ASL Education Employee Handbook Health Insurance Human Resources ITAR softare Finance and Banking Payroll Uncategorised Subscribe World Languages 5 Fascinating Facts About Hebrew March 7, 2017 2 min read Nicole Piazza, Sales Coordinator Hebrew is an interesting and dynamic language, that is among the oldest in the world. But unless you grew up studying Hebrew, chances are you — like most of the English-speaking world — only know the phrases that have been adopted into popular lexicon, like “mazel tov.” Here are the top five most fascinating facts about the Hebrew language: Technically speaking, there are no vowels in the Hebrew alphabet. The Hebrew alphabet has 22 letters, and all of them are consonants. For children and early language learners, there are dots that are placed above words that indicate vowels to assist in pronunciation and understanding, but the language itself doesn’t have a single vowel. Hebrew is one of the original languages of the Bible. Biblical scholars assert that the original text was available in three languages: Greek, Aramaic, and Hebrew. And back during the era in which the Bible was written, Hebrew was a widely spoken language. After 200 AD, however, it died out as a spoken language and was used only in writing. It was revived as a spoken language in the 19th century. Much of what we understand about standard language doesn’t apply to Hebrew. For example, there is no way to say “to be” in Hebrew. So if you were to write the sentence “He is there” in Hebrew, it would consist only of the words “He” and “there.” Additionally, men and women use different verbs. The words in Hebrew are slightly different, depending upon who is using them. So although the meaning of a sentence ends up the same, the words are different based on who is using them. The word for God in Hebrew (Elohim) is actually a plural noun that always takes on a singular verb. This beautiful inconsistency is representative of the unity of plurality in the concept of God in Judaism. Hebrew is written from right to left. That one you might have heard before, but the reason for it is pretty interesting. Scholars asserted that Hebrew was written from right to left because, when people where chiseling in stone, they would hold the chisel with their dominant hand — typically speaking, their right one — and it was easier to move the chisel from right to left than from left to right. Hebrew is a genuinely interesting language with a rich history. With various technological and medical startups calling Israel home, demand for Hebrew translation is increasing. 5 Fascinating Facts About Hebrew ","margin_remove_bottom":false,"text_style":"","class":"blogtitle","maxwidth":"large","maxwidth_align":""}},{"name":"Subtitle","type":"text","props":{"margin":"default","column_breakpoint":"m","content":"","maxwidth":"xlarge","class":""}},{"name":"Author","type":"text","props":{"margin":"large","column_breakpoint":"m","content":" Caitlin Nicholson ","margin_remove_bottom":false,"column":"","margin_remove_top":false,"class":"blogauthor"}},{"name":"Module: AddThis","type":"joomla_module","props":{"menu_style":"nav","module":"92","type":"mod_custom","margin":"remove-vertical"}}]},{"name":"","type":"column","props":{"widths":[""],"image_position":"center-center","style":"","padding":"small"},"children":[{"name":"Blog Article - Mobile Header Img","type":"panel","props":{"link_text":"Read more","title_element":"h3","met

---

## listenandlearn: https://www.listenandlearnusa.com/blog/9-surprising-facts-about-the-hebrew-language/

9 Surprising Facts About the Hebrew Language - Listen &amp; Learn USA Language lessons across the USA and Canada Call us! 1-877-566-9299 / 1-416-800-9242 IN-PERSON COURSES ONLINE CLASSES TEACHING JOBS PRICING OUR CLIENTS FAQ BLOG Start learning! IN-PERSON COURSES ONLINE CLASSES TEACHING JOBS PRICING OUR CLIENTS FAQ BLOG Start learning! Read and Learn with Listen & Learn’s blog ARCHIVES CATEGORIES 1win Azerbajany 1xbet apk 1xbet arabic 1xbet Azerbajan 1xbet Azerbaydjan 1xbet Brazil 1xbet egypt 1xbet giriş 1xbet Kazahstan 1xbet qeydiyyat 1xbet Russian AZ Most BET b1bet apostas babble Betmotion brazil Casino Chinese Culture Danish German glutton hooligans India India Mostbet Italian Japanese Korean Korean business language guru mostbet apk mostbet az 90 Mostbet Azerbaycan mostbet giriş Mostbet India mostbet uz mostbet uz kirish Mostbet Uzbekistan must know Norwegian pagbet brazil PinUp apk Polish Portuguese quirk random serious showbiz Slovak South African Spanish Swedish technophile Thai Thai Language UZ Most bet Vietnamese vulkan vegas DE vulkan vegas DE login Vulkan Vegas Germany Vulkan Vegas Poland VulkanVegas Poland wanderlust 9 Surprising Facts About the Hebrew Language How much do you know about Hebrew? If you’re like most English speakers, not much. Indeed, the Hebrew language has found its way into our collective lexicon with certain phrases like “shalom” and “mazel tov”, but unless you’ve studied it, chances are your knowledge of Hebrew ends there. For instance, did you know that the Hebrew alphabet has no vowels? Or that the language had no speakers for a 1500-year dormant period? Here, we’ve put together some fun and unusual facts about Hebrew to expand your knowledge of this historically rich language. Image via idobi / Wikipedia 1. There’s no way to say “to be”. The Hebrew language does not have a verb that translates to “to be”; rather, in sentences that would use “to be” in English, there is no verb at all. For instance, אני פה (“I am here”) consists of just two words: אני (I) and פה (here). 2. It’s one of the original languages of the Bible. Most scholars agree that the Bible was originally written in three languages: Hebrew, Aramaic, and Greek. 3. Men and women use different verbs. Verbs take distinct forms depending on whether the subject of the sentence is male or female. A man, for example, might say אני לא מבין (“ani lo mevin”, or “I don’t understand), whereas a woman would say אני לא מבינה (“ani lo mevina”), which means the same thing. 4. The Hebrew alphabet has no vowels. There are 22 letters in the Hebrew alphabet, and all of them are consonants. Therefore, in standard written Hebrew, the vowels are implicit. However, in children’s books and texts designed for learners, vowels are added to words in the form of small dots that appear above and below each consonant, as in the picture below. Image via Wikipedia 5. Hebrew went through a dormant period of over 1500 years. Around 200 AD, Hebrew died out as an everyday spoken language, even though it had existed for many centuries before. It remained dormant for over 1500 years until it was revived in the 19th century. During this dormant period, Hebrew still existed in its written form, and was used in Jewish liturgy and rabbinic texts. 6. Hebrew is regulated by an official academy. Many languages, such as Spanish and French , are regulated by official academies, which provide guidelines for grammar and control which words are added to the dictionary. Hebrew is regulated by the Academy of the Hebrew Language, which was established by the Israeli government in 1953. 7. There’s no way of saying “I would like”. Politeness is a top concern for many foreign-language learners. If you want to ask for something in Hebrew, however, there’s no way to say that you “would like” something. Instead, you have to be direct, and say that you want something (using the verb רוצה , “rotseh”). How good is your Hebrew? Find out by taking our free online Hebrew level test ! 8. Hebrew letters can change depending on their location in a word. Five Hebrew letters &#8212; צ ,פ ,נ ,מ and כ &#8212; have two forms. They appear as written previously when they occur in the beginning or middle of a word. However, the same letters are written as ץ ,ף ,ן ,ם and ך when they come at the end of a word. 9. Hebrew is written from right to left. Okay, you might have already known this one: unlike most languages, which are written from left to right, Hebrew is written from right to left. But do you know why? Nobody is sure, but a popular theory is that writing from right to left was easier for engravers when they were chiseling words onto stone tablets. These engravers would hold the hammer in their stronger hand (typically their right hand), making it easier to write from right to left. Now, in addition to shouting “mazel tov” at a party, you can talk about the unique history of the Hebrew language, and expound on theories as to why it’s written the way it is. The information on th

---

# Balashon Articles (8)

## arnona
https://www.balashon.com/2011/03/arnona.html

Saturday, March 05, 2011 arnona We previously discussed blo בלו , a tax first mentioned in the book of Ezra. Blo is mentioned together with two other taxes that are not used in modern Hebrew: minda מנדה and halach הלך. The three terms are discussed in Bava Batra 8a, and halach is identified as arnona ארנונא. Arnona (as ארנונה) is certainly familiar to Israelis today - it's municipal tax determined by the size of the property. However, in Talmudic times it was an agricultural tax (originally on grain, then extended to land, cattle, and clothing ). Then, as now, it was not particularly loved, and this can be sensed in the etymology as well. We've mentioned before that although the Jews of the Talmudic period (in the Land of Israel) were under Roman rule, almost all the foreign words in Talmudic Hebrew were from Greek. The exceptions are almost always related to the military. Arnona is an adaptation of the Latin annona (the Hebrew equivalent אנונא or אנונה is found in Midrash Rabbah), meaning "yearly produce", from annus , "year" (as in the word " annual "). Steinsaltz comments that troops passing through an area would collect food as part of the arnona tax, and this is perhaps a connection to the Biblical halach ("walking"). A question I've been asked in the past is, "Why is the Jerusalem neighborhood Arnona called that? Why would they name a neighborhood after a tax?" Well, there are two theories about the origin of the name - neither of which is connected to the tax. One is that it is named for the Arnon river in Jordan, which empties into the Dead Sea, which is visible from the neighborhood. The other theory is that it was named for the the daughter of the scholar Ben-Zion Luria, Arnona , who was herself named for the river. The river, Nachal Arnon נחל ארנון - is mentioned a number of times in the Tanach, and some say gets its name from its noisy nature (the root רנן means to be loud, either in joy or in complaint). Tweet Pin It Posted by Balashon at 11:35 PM Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest No comments: Post a Comment Newer Post Older Post Home Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom) Search all Balashon posts About this site I'm a native English speaker, but live in Israel and love the Hebrew language. On this site I investigate Hebrew - Biblical, Talmudic, Medieval and Modern - including slang; related languages like Aramaic, Arabic, Akkadian and Yiddish; and how foreign languages like Greek, Latin and English have entered Hebrew - and how Hebrew has affected those languages as well. I discuss the meanings of words, with a focus on etymology. Please feel free to leave a note in the comments or send me an email . I can't promise to reply to every email, but your questions might lead to a future post! Who is Balashon? ?למה לא בעברית Balashon on Facebook Balashon on X (Twitter) Subscribe to Balashon by email Get new posts by email: Subscribe You&#8217;ll confirm your subscription on Blogtrottr. Powered by Blogtrottr

---

## blo
https://www.balashon.com/2011/02/blo.html

Sunday, February 27, 2011 blo Lately there has been a lot of news about the proposed increase (and subsequent decrease) in Israel's excise tax on gasoline. Until I looked into it, I did not know what an excise tax was. According to Wikipedia, it differs from custom duties: An excise tax is one levied on specific goods or commodities produced or sold within a country, or on licenses granted for specific activities. Excises are distinguished from customs duties, which are taxes on importation. Excises are inland taxes, whereas customs duties are border taxes. and is also different than sales tax: an excise is distinguished from a sales tax or VAT in three ways: (i) an excise typically applies to a narrower range of products; (ii) an excise is typically heavier, accounting for higher fractions (sometimes half or more) of the retail prices of the targeted products; and (iii) an excise is typically specific (so much per unit of measure; e.g. so many cents per gallon), whereas a sales tax or VAT is ad valorem, i.e. proportional to value (a percentage of the price in the case of a sales tax, or of value added in the case of a VAT). But what really confused me was the name for excise in Hebrew- blo בלו. I thought it was likely a foreign word - perhaps a mispronunciation of one. So I was certainly surprised to find out that the word is actually biblical! It appears, together with other types of taxes, in the Aramaic section of the Book of Ezra (4:13,20; 7:24). The Daat Mikra explains b'lo there as a type of food tax. In Bava Batra 8a, the gemara identifies blo as a capitation tax (tax per person). Klein, perhaps influenced by the gemara, says the biblical meaning is "poll tax." How it came to mean "excise" in Modern Hebrew is unclear to me (Ben Yehuda does not have an entry for the word at all.) As far as the etymology is concerned, Klein writes that it is of unknown origin, and the Daat Mikra says it is perhaps from Persian. However, others say that it derives from the Akkadian biltu - "tribute, gift" (from the verb wabalu , "to bring"), which may be related to the Hebrew root יבל meaning "to bear, carry, conduct". This is would be equivalent to the word masa משא, which can mean both "carrying, burden" as well as "tribute, present", and derives from the root נשא, meaning "to bear, carry" as well. From יבל, we get the word yevul יבול - "produce, yield" (according to Klein, literally "that which is brought in or gathered in") and hovala הובלה - "transport". Klein also mentions a few more words which perhaps also derive from the root יבל: mabul מבול - "flood". He quotes Gesenius as saying that it derives from יבל meaning "to flow". Others say it comes from נבל, to destroy. yabelet יבלת - "wart". He writes that perhaps it literally means "a running sore". yovel יובל - "jubilee". As we've previously discussed , before it meant jubilee, it meant "ram". Klein writes that it probably derives from יבל, and originally meant "leader of the flock, bellwether". ( Thi

---

## ish and isha
https://www.balashon.com/2008/10/ish-and-isha.html

Friday, October 17, 2008 ish and isha Categories: dropped nuns , kinship terms , Parashat Bereishit , Parashat Chukat , Parashat Vezot Habracha The first words the Torah quotes Adam as saying appear right after his wife was created. He gives her a name, but also mentions a connection between his name and hers: ו&#1463;י&#1468;&#1465;אמ&#1462;ר, ה&#1464;א&#1464;ד&#1464;ם, ז&#1465;את ה&#1463;פ&#1468;&#1463;ע&#1463;ם ע&#1462;צ&#1462;ם מ&#1461;ע&#1458;צ&#1464;מ&#1463;י, ו&#1468;ב&#1464;ש&#1474;&#1464;ר מ&#1460;ב&#1468;&#1456;ש&#1474;&#1464;ר&#1460;י; ל&#1456;ז&#1465;את י&#1460;ק&#1468;&#1464;ר&#1461;א א&#1460;ש&#1468;&#1473;&#1464;ה, כ&#1468;&#1460;י מ&#1461;א&#1460;יש&#1473; ל&#1467;ק&#1456;ח&#1464;ה-ז&#1468;&#1465;את. Then the man said, "This one at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. This one shall be called Woman ( isha ) for from man ( ish ) she was taken". (Bereshit 2:23) As you might imagine, I love the idea that the first recorded human sentence include an etymology! Ibn Ezra says that the words ish איש and isha אשה are related, and Rashi goes even further. Based on the midrash in Bereshit Rabba (18:4), he says that from this verse we learn that the world was created in Hebrew! However, there are a few difficulties with what we've said so far. First of all, almost all modern linguists say that ish and isha aren't related. Ish comes from the root אוש, meaning strength (the related root אשש means "to strengthen"), and isha derives from אנש, meaning weak. (The common plural of both - anashim אנשים - "men" and nashim - נשים - "women" also derive from אנש). Aside from the fact that the Torah mentions them together, it might seem difficult to believe that they aren't from the same root. We see the letter heh added as a feminine suffix in many words. Why shouldn't we accept what appears to be the obvious etymology here as well? Well, first of all, we should be careful of "obvious" etymologies. I've warned a number of times of the danger of assuming that words in English and Hebrew that have similar sounds and meanings are related. But we need to be just as careful when it comes to words in the same language. My friend Mike Gerver has a list of false cognates in English, with pairs of words that most people would find it hard to believe aren't from the same root: for example, pull and pulley , isle and island . I would add to this list one very relevant to our topic: male and female ! Secondly, it's important to note the the woman is receiving a name here. We see many times that the etymology of names given in the Torah does not match up exactly with the linguistic etymologies. For example, the Torah connects the name Noach נח with the root נחם, even though the two aren't connected. (For a good analysis of this phenomenon, read this post on Parshablog.) But perhaps most significantly, there's a grammatical problem here as well. The word isha has a dagesh in the shin . Ibn Ezra says this is to distinguish it from the homonym ishah -"her hu

---

## why not in hebrew?
https://www.balashon.com/2008/05/why-not-in-hebrew.html

Thursday, May 15, 2008 why not in hebrew? (This post is explaining why this site is not written in Hebrew). לפעמים שואלים אותי, "אם אתה כותב על לשון העברית, למה האתר לא בעברית?" יש שתי סיבות: א) למרות שאני אוהב ללמוד על עברית, ויש לי נסיון בכתיבה בעברית, יש לי עדיין הרבה טעויות, בדקדוק ובאיות. אני חושש שהשגיאות האלה יסיחו את דעתו של הקורא מתוכן המאמר. ב) אני כותב הרבה על השינויים של משמעויות של מילים בעברית במשך הדורות. קשה מאד לעשות את זה בכתיבה בעברית, כי אז לא ברור אם אני מדבר על המילה או על המושג. קחו את המאמר הזה לדוגמא. אני טוען שמה שקוראים "חורף" היום זה בעצם סתיו, ו-"סתיו" הוא חורף. הרבה יותר קל לעשות את זה באנגלית, שבה אני יכול להגיד ש: While today stav means "autumn", originally it referred to winter בעברית זה היה "היום סתיו זה סתיו אבל במקור היה חורף" רואים את הקושי? אז אני מתנצל לאלה שקשה להם באנגלית, אבל אני מניח בסוף גם הם ילמדו משהו על העברית... Tweet Pin It Posted by DLC at 11:34 AM Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest No comments: Post a Comment Newer Post Older Post Home Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom) Search all Balashon posts About this site I'm a native English speaker, but live in Israel and love the Hebrew language. On this site I investigate Hebrew - Biblical, Talmudic, Medieval and Modern - including slang; related languages like Aramaic, Arabic, Akkadian and Yiddish; and how foreign languages like Greek, Latin and English have entered Hebrew - and how Hebrew has affected those languages as well. I discuss the meanings of words, with a focus on etymology. Please feel free to leave a note in the comments or send me an email . I can't promise to reply to every email, but your questions might lead to a future post! Who is Balashon? ?למה לא בעברית Balashon on Facebook Balashon on X (Twitter) Subscribe to Balashon by email Get new posts by email: Subscribe You&#8217;ll confirm your subscription on Blogtrottr. Powered by Blogtrottr Categories (for many of the posts) body parts (11) books (18) chanukah (12) colors (14) continents (4) directions (6) dropped nuns (11) food (64) hebrew letters (22) hebrew numbers (10) holiday (5) kinship terms (12) Kohelet (2) Kohelet words (21) kri and ktiv (6) Lag BaOmer (7) legal terms (6) Parashat Achrei Mot (2) Parashat Balak (4) Parashat Bamidbar (3) Parashat Bechukotai (2) Parashat Behaalotcha (6) Parashat Behar (2) Parashat Bereishit (11) Parashat Beshalach (11) Parashat Bo (13) Parashat Chayei Sarah (5) Parashat Chukat (6) Parashat Devarim (7) Parashat Ekev (8) Parashat Emor (11) Parashat Ha&#39;azinu (4) Parashat Kedoshim (2) Parashat Ki Tavo (5) Parashat Ki Tetze (7) Parashat Ki Tisa (7) Parashat Korach (5) Parashat Lech Lecha (10) Parashat Masei (3) Parashat Matot (5) Parashat Metzora (2) Parashat Miketz (12) Parashat Mishpatim (11) Parashat Naso (6) Parashat Noach (19) Parashat Pekudei (3) Parashat Pinchas (10) Parashat Re&#39;eh (10) Parashat Shelach (5) Parashat Shemini (8) Parashat Shemot (14) Parashat Shoftim (2) Parashat Tazria (5) Parashat Terum

---

## avuka and ptil
https://www.balashon.com/2007/12/avuka-and-ptil.html

Friday, December 07, 2007 avuka and ptil Categories: Parashat Vayetze , Parashat Vayishlach It's clear by now that my indexing is taking much longer than I originally expected. And there have been a number of "distractions" that have come up during this time period. But I have received a few requests to continue to write even before the index is done. So just so you know that I continue to pay my electric bill (and that I'm still alive), I'll make sure to put up a regular post (although less frequently than before.) Although I've spent most of my time indexing books and websites that I've used in the past, I have come across some new material. Well, new to me anyway. An amazing book that I picked up a couple of weeks ago is Yad Halashon (1964) by Yitzhak Avinery, the linguist also well known as the author of Heichal Rashi . This 600+ page book has hundreds of articles that Avinery wrote over a course of decades. The English subtitle calls it a "lexicon of linguistic problems in the Hebrew language." I'm sure I'll refer to it regularly, as it provides an important bridge between the Ben Yehuda's dictionary and innovations and the modern Hebrew I speak in 2007. There are not a few entries about words that I've already written about - but it will probably take even longer for me to go back and review them. Anyway, on to today's post. In a 1949 article, Avinery makes a connection between two words: avukah אבוקה - "torch" and ptil פתיל - "wick, cord" (also ptila פתילה). The etymology of ptil is well known. It derives from the root פתל - "to twist, twine". It also means "to wrestle", and from here we get the origin of the name Naftali (see Bereshit 30:8). The origin of avuka is less clear. Klein says the origin is unclear. He is probably following Ben Yehuda, who writes that "the origin of the word is not clear, but perhaps it is a shortened form of אבהוקה avhuka , from the root בהק - "to shine, glow". However, there is an earlier etymology for avuka , as presented by the Ramban in his commentary to Bereshit 32:25 In this verse we find the root אבק as a verb: ו&#1463;י&#1468;&#1460;ו&#1468;&#1464;ת&#1461;ר י&#1463;ע&#1458;ק&#1465;ב, ל&#1456;ב&#1463;ד&#1468;ו&#1465;; ו&#1463;י&#1468;&#1461;א&#1464;ב&#1461;ק א&#1460;יש&#1473; ע&#1460;מ&#1468;ו&#1465;, ע&#1463;ד ע&#1458;לו&#1465;ת ה&#1463;ש&#1468;&#1473;&#1464;ח&#1463;ר "Yaakov was left alone; and a man wrestled with him until the break of dawn". It is clear that the word ויאבק means "he wrestled", but what is the etymology? Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi in Chullin 91a provides two different theories: וריב"ל אמר אמר קרא (בראשית לב) בהאבקו עמו כאדם שחובק את חבירו "Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: The Torah writes (Bereshit 32:26) 'as he wrestled בהאבקו with him' - as a person embraces - chovek חובק - his friend". אמר ר' יהושע ב"ל מלמד שהעלו אבק מרגלותם עד כסא הכבוד "Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: this teaches us that the dust - avak אבק - of their feet went up to the Divine Throne." Each of these explanations finds 

---

## mozeg
https://www.balashon.com/2009/03/mozeg.html

Wednesday, March 18, 2009 mozeg Categories: food , pesach , Shir HaShirim With Pesach coming soon, I'd like to take a look at a word that appears in the very beginning of the Haggadah. Before Ha Lachma Anya , even before kiddush - there is the phrase: מוזגים כוס ראשון mozgim kos rishon . Generally translated as "pour the first cup", this might seem like a simple instruction, and not worthy of much notice. And in fact, none of the many hagadot that I checked discussed the word mozeg מוזג at all. But as we often see here, there's more to it than meets the eye. Let's start by looking at the word mozeg . While it does mean "pour" in modern Hebrew, that wasn't the original meaning of the word. It appears in Biblical Hebrew once - in the noun form mezeg מזג, in Shir HaShirim 7:3. Its sister form, מסך, appears a number of times - both as a verb masach (Yishayahu 5:22, 19:14, Tehilim 102:10, Mishlei 9:2,5) and as the nouns mesek (Tehilim 75:9) and mimsak ממסך (Yishayahu 65:11, Mishlei 23:30). What does it mean? It means "to mix", specifically to mix wine. Some of my readers will jump at the similarities between mezeg / mesek and the English word " mix " - or its Greek source misgein . As this scholar pointed out, the מ&#1464;ס&#1456;כ&#1464;ה י&#1461;ינ&#1464;ה&#1468; - mascha yeina of Mishlei 9:2 looks a lot like English and Latin: When Jerome must translate miscuit vinum , and the RSV "she has mixed her wine," we have an uncanny feeling that Latin and English are part of the same linguistic world as Hebrew. And there are those who do try to connect them. We've seen before that there seems to be a Greek connection to many of the words in Shir HaShirim , and Graetz thinks that mezeg might be a Greek borrowing as well. However, most scholars think that's not likely , and they don't even point to a possible earlier common root (as we saw with wine and yayin ). There are those that actually connect מזג / מסך to the Egyptian mdg/mtk . While mesek shows up more times than mezeg in the Tanach, in Rabbinic Hebrew, the verb mozeg is much more common. (The Even Shoshan dictionary strangely quotes the Mishna in Berachot 8:2 and Pesachim 10:2 as examples in their entry for מזג under the meaning "pour", when the Mishna clearly meant "mix". ) In fact in Avoda Zara 58b, we see that the rabbis noted this development: R. Assi asked R. Yochanan: How is it when wine is mixed ( masak ) by a heathen? &#8212; He said to him: Use the verb mazag ! [R. Assi] replied: I used the Scriptural word as in, "She has slain her sacrifice, she has mixed [ masekah ] her wine" (Mishlei 9:2). He said to him: The language of the Torah is distinct and so is the language of the Sages. The verb mozeg continues to mean "mix" in Medieval (and later) Hebrew as well. In fact, there's an interesting parallel between the English word " temper " and mezeg . Temper originally meant "to mix". From here we get temperament - the composition (mix) of one's personality, and mezeg had the same meaning in Jew

---

## chemah
https://www.balashon.com/2006/05/chemah.html

Wednesday, May 31, 2006 chemah Categories: food , Parashat Vayera In honor of Shavuot, lets look at a staple dairy food: chemah (or chem'ah ) - חמאה. In Modern Hebrew this always refers to butter, but in Biblical times that wasn't necessarily the case. In Bereshit 18:8, Avraham is going to serve chemah to his guests. Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan, in The Living Torah , translates chemah as "cottage cheese", and writes : Chemah in Hebrew, usually translated as curd. It is something that can be eaten alone; see Isaiah 7:15, 7:22; cf. Proverbs 30:33. Others interpret it to denote a kind of leben or yoghurt. According to Rashi, the word chemah denotes cream. (cf. Targum and Judges 5:25). The Septuagint, on the other hand, translates it as butter. Indeed, in Middle Eastern lands, it was the custom to eat butter alone. So we see a pretty wide range of dairy products as possible translations. Klein says that the word chemah is related to the Arabic hami'a - "it was turbid". According to this site : As the word chemah , here translated butter, signifies disturbed, agitated, probable that buttermilk is intended. The Arabs form their buttermilk by agitating the milk in a leathery bag This fits in well with the parallel given in Mishlei 30:33 - כ&#1468;&#1460;י מ&#1460;יץ ח&#1464;ל&#1464;ב, יו&#1465;צ&#1460;יא ח&#1462;מ&#1456;א&#1464;ה-- ו&#1468;מ&#1460;יץ-א&#1463;ף, יו&#1465;צ&#1460;יא ד&#1464;ם;ו&#1468;מ&#1460;יץ א&#1463;פ&#1468;&#1463;י&#1460;ם, יו&#1465;צ&#1460;יא ר&#1460;יב. "'The churning of milk brings forth butter, the wringing of the nose brings forth blood, and the forcing of anger brings forth strife" The connection of "turbid", "agitated", and "anger" may give us a clue to the origin of the word. It may be related to the Hebrew chema חמה - "anger". (There is also likely a connection between both חמה and חמאה and the word for heat - חום chom . When one is angry, he is "heated up". But it does not seem to be that chemah חמאה directly derives from "heat".) This gives an etymological connection to a strange association I have every year at Purim. When I hear Ester 3:5 -- ו&#1463;י&#1468;&#1460;מ&#1468;&#1464;ל&#1461;א ה&#1464;מ&#1464;ן, ח&#1461;מ&#1464;ה, I can't help thinking of Haman (maybe hamantaschen ?) filled with butter.... The Hebrew word for compliment - מחמאה machma'ah , derives from chemah . However, there's more to it than just a parallel to the English " butter up ". As this article explains, the word machma'ah was formed from a misreading of Tehillim 55:22 - ח&#1464;ל&#1456;קו&#1468;, מ&#1463;ח&#1456;מ&#1464;א&#1465;ת פ&#1468;&#1460;יו-- ו&#1468;ק&#1456;ר&#1464;ב-ל&#1460;ב&#1468;ו&#1465;:ר&#1463;כ&#1468;ו&#1468; ד&#1456;ב&#1464;ר&#1464;יו מ&#1460;ש&#1468;&#1473;&#1462;מ&#1462;ן; ו&#1456;ה&#1461;מ&#1468;&#1464;ה פ&#1456;ת&#1460;חו&#1465;ת. The translation of the verse should properly read "his talk was smoother than butter", which is parallel to the second half "his words were more soothing than oil". In this case, the mem in machmaot indicates "g

---

## pri
https://www.balashon.com/2011/01/pri.html

Thursday, January 20, 2011 pri Categories: food In honor of Tu B'Shvat, the Academy of the Hebrew Language posted a page about the Hebrew word for fruit: פרי - p'ri ( I prefer this spelling over pri , since it emphasizes the vocalized shva . We also find a few instances of peri - with a segol - in Biblical Hebrew.) They point out that in the Tanach, p'ri only appears as a collective noun (שם קיבוצי). This means that while it is in the singular form, it can refer to a group of more than one of the object. (See this page from Safa Ivrit, which gives many other examples of Biblical collective nouns. The question of whether a particular noun is a singular or a collective noun causes much debate among the commentators.) So the Biblical p'ri can either refer to an individual fruit or "fruit, produce" as a whole. In Rabbinic Hebrew we first find the plural perot פירות. They quote the Mishna (Berachot 6:1) as showing the mix of the two forms: על פ&#1468;&#1461;רות האילן הוא אומר: בורא פרי העץ. On fruits ( perot ) of the tree ( ilan ), he blesses " borei p'ri ha'etz " Although the rabbis spoke post-Biblical Hebrew, they generally used the Biblical forms of the word for the blessings. So here we have p'ri as the plural, as well as etz instead of ilan for "tree". The Academy also writes that p'ri is related to the verb פרה, meaning "to be fruitful". This is better than Klein who writes that p'ri comes from פרה. For as Tur Sinai writes in his footnote to פרה, the verb actually derives from the noun, since the noun has many cognates in Semitic languages, where the verb does not. Reader Shaul wrote to me: What is the etymology of peri ? Is it at all related to English "fruit," which ultimately derives from Latin "fructus" and Proto-Indo-European before that? The two words do not seem to be related. As the Online Etymology Dictionary (and others) point out, the Proto-Indo-European root is *bhrug , meaning "to enjoy", which is distant from p'ri meaning "fruit". However, there are other possible candidates for related English words. For example, in the comments on our post about tapuach תפוח , we discuss the possibility of the Latin pirum (the origin of the English word "pear"), being related to p'ri (it is also discussed in this old book ). Other English words possibly connected (although with plenty of theories to the contrary) include "berry", "bear" (as in bear fruit), and "fertile" (both from the PIE root *bher , which we've shown may be related to the Hebrew words apiryon אפריון and parnasa פרנסה .) See also this article , which tries to explain how many of these roots are connected, and also adds in the Hebrew יבול yevul , meaning "produce". But this is all just speculation. And as it's Tu B'Shvat - let's focus on the fruits of the Land of Israel! Tweet Pin It Posted by Balashon at 10:04 AM Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest No comments: Post a Comment Newer Post Older Post Home Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom) Search al

---

Hebrew borrowings in to Russian language The reader is already acquainted with a list of lexical borrowings from Hebrew to Russian language through my previous publication “Hebrew, Russian and the Khazars S tory ”. I present here a few additions to the list, which have accumulated over the years. П обеда-pobeda - Victory The word is c omposed of п о + беда - po + beda - trouble . Po , as we have seen, in Hebrew mean s here . As to trouble - beda – there is no known origin to this word in Hebrew . Further, it appears that that the phonetically and semantically based may, in fact, be reverse, for how has victory become trouble ? A possible explanation is found in Vasmer 's Etymological Dictionary , stating that victory in Old Russian meant defeat. Hence, trouble may be an appropriate explanation after all, considering the evolution of this word over time. We may assume that , beginning from antiquity , the Russian-speaking population may have has different perceptions for similar events; where some viewed events as victory , others recognized them as defeat , or trouble . Consequently, w inners were using the same term as those defeated to describe events, while attributing a different meaning to this term. It may also be, that winners were only recently acquainted with the Slavic language and unfamiliar with the various possible meanings of each word. Hence, the transformation of the meaning of the word from trouble to victory, noted by Vasmer , is clarified . Abracadabra - абракадабра Th is broadly-used word describes something devoid of meaning. Etymolog ically and based on historical written evidence, it is linked with a certain spell pronounced emperor Caracullus ' physician (3rd century AD) , in the Aramaic language . I believe it is in fact a borrowing from Hebrew. ̶ הברא כדברה - avre kadabera ̶ recover according to her word ( means word of Holy Scripture ̶ Torah ) – what could be more suitable for the purpose of healing ? Б урить-burity - Drill In Hebrew, בור - bor means pit . T his may be connected to the origin of the verb бурить - burity to dril l consequently leading to the creation of a pit. The Etymological Dictionary points to the German bohr and Turki sh bur , both also meaning to drill , but does not state their origin. Х вороба - к hvoroba - Disease Hebrew חבורה - havura - bruise originates in Ac c adian. Vasmer mentions links to Sanskrit and other Indo-European proto-languages . Perhaps this is evidence of ancient contacts between the Semitic and Indo-European languages , hence the Hebrew nominative bruise is origin to one of the Russian words meaning disease . In fact, b ruise was possibly a leading cause for disease in Russia due to the common villagers’ custom of boxing matches amongst young men. Артания , Арец и Рус - Artania , Arets and Rus Artania is t he name of the mysterious country from which Russian merchants arrived in Khazaria . Al Istakhri , a Muslim historian and geographer dating to the 10 th century, names a Russian tribe - whose merchants are found in Khazaria - Arsania . Ars is the name of their city. Unlike other Russian centers like Kiyoba or Tmutarakan , Ars and Arsania ha ve not been identified definitively to this day. Al Istarhi writes that no foreigner returned from there (more specifically, that foreigners we re killed there), although Arsania n merchants exist and bring sables, foxes and tin. In Hebrew ארץ - aretz means - country. Hence Ars may be just a country . And ארצנו - Arceinu , Arsania or Artania means Our Country. It is possible that merchants fluent in used it instead of other n ames , perhaps in order to hide the particular geographical information from Russian Khazars . Or that the Khazar ian in terlocutors knew Hebrew as well and understand them. . О каянный - okayanhiy - Cursed, restless This was certainly taken from the Bibl ical story of Abel and Kain. It is unknown whether this word was awaiting the baptism of Vladimir Monomakh or was previously rooted in the Russian language. I personally believe i t entered the language directly through Russian children learning Bible stories in Jewish, Christian and Muslim schools in Khazaria , 200 years before Monomakh. Вельзевул - velzevul - Beelzebub Wikipedia mentions its origin in the Hebrew Bibl ical term בעל זבוב - baal zvuv , which is the was name of the deity at the city of Ekron . If this is indeed the case, I find the sound of Beelze v u v - velzevuv preferable. On the other hand, the Hebrew בעל סבל - baal sevel means the Owner of misery or T he D evil , a dditionally lending the sound of Вельзевул-velzevul to Russian with the same meaning as the original Hebrew. Could this be the origin to one of the Devil’s Russians names? Х алтура - khaltura - Quickie Finally we arrive here: A well-known historian drew my attention to this word, pointing out to those who associate the word culture with the phonetical koltora – , כל תורה , i.e. t he whole T estament (in Hebrew) . Assuming the similarity between koltora and khaltora , khaltura may link culture with a hack . Let us delve in deeper; Most etymologies of the Russian word халтура find its origin in church life. O ne such source describes men occupied by khaltura as monastic librarians during the 11 th -14 th centuries. The Etymological Dictionary defines халтура - khaltura as an entry in the burial book. In both cases, we are referring to an orderly clerical action. In Hebrew חל תור - hal tor means the turn has come . So much for the khaltura , as the definition of both church office and part-time work at the same time. Its other meaning, related to the careless quality of products , attracted the attention of a previously unnamed historia n and evidently evolved, in the beginning of the 20 th century into the opposite meaning to associated with accu rate office work. Т овар и товарищ - tovar and tovarish - Product and comrade Vasmer in his Etymological Dictionary links these words to the Turki sh tovar . I suggest the Hebrew דבר – davar as a possible source, meaning a thing . A commodity, as a rule, is a thing, and so may have entered the Russian language through Jew ish merchants , rather than through nomadic Turks. As to the suffix – ish : איש - ish in Hebrew means a person , i.e. a man of goods ( things ) – tovar ’ s ish , or more precisely: one who is comrade to the deal , an ally , or a man of common business (a s a comrade should be ). Г алдеть , гвалт - galdety , gvalt - Shout, hullabaloo Vasmer mentions links between these two words in his D ictionary. He rejects the h ypothesis that stated their origin in Hebrew , seeking German sources. I propose viewing the Hebrew הבל - hevel as the primary source . In Hebrew, the expression הב ל פיו - hevel piv means an illegible, meaningless statement . The sound, denoted in Hebrew by the letter ה - English h is sometimes transformed into Russian - г( g ) , a s in the word הר - har – mountain gora ( гора ) in Russian (also seen in the German hertz and Russian gertz ( герц ) ). Х озяин , хозяйство - khozyain,khozyaystvo - Host,owner , farm In roots of these words one may recognize the Hebrew חוזה - hoze - contract . Russian poetess Inna Ros was the first to recognize and publish a hypothesis regarding this connection. Л ясы точить - lyas h i tochity - To sharpen the tongue In Hebrew, a similar expression - חידודי לשון - hidudey lashon - has been known for at least a thousand years. Hidud literally means shar pening - точить - tochity in Russian , and lashon means tongue . Here, therefore, S h turns into s and lashon into lyas ’ h i ( tongue ) Лясы . Such borrowing of a popular idiom testifies to the environment in which it took place , apparently an intellectually advanced society . К атавасия - к atavasiya - Disorder This word originated , according to the Etymological Dictionary , in Greek, i ndicating the performance of religious hymns by the integration of various choirs . Without suggesting another etymology, we note that, breaking it down into syllables, we get k a tav asiya , which in Hebrew means - כ תו עשיה ketav asiya - execution like a note . Whether Hebrew influenced Greek in this case has yet to be determined . In wither case, the Jewish Bible contains the expression נעשה ונשמע , that is, first do and then listen . Perhaps , then, earl y Christian s took this literally as execution. К олымага - к olhimaga - Rattletrap This is a wreck wagon or cart . Most likely, the combination of Hebrew - כול kol - everything and - עימה - imaha - with her created this term, referring to a wagon carrying inside anything and everything. This may have entered Russian through H ebrew speaking merchants . Т a ким макаром - takim makarom - That way This is a Russian idiom. Ta ким means that in Russian , while мак а ром or мак а р has merely one additional example in Russian , as a first name for a man. This idea was previously analyzed i n the previous paper “Hebrew Russian and Khazar ’ s story” , as the Hebrew word מכר - makar – known . Hence, the Russian idiom “ Таким макаром - takim mak a rom ” is composed of the Russian Т ak -t ак and Hebrew מכר - мак а р , using Russian grammar rules for words couplin g, liternally meaning ” that known way ” . К умир - kumir - Idol The word к умир - kumir word is based on the Hebrew root כמר - kamar - to fumigate . The modern כומר - comer – a priest in Hebrew originates from it . Vasmer does not object to the Hebrew origin, but is challenged as to how it entered the Russian language. The response to this challenge therefore be t hrough the Khazars and their concurrent use of Hebrew and Russian . С кверна - skverna - Filth I t is difficult to understand why Vasmer chose to overlook the Semitic origin of this word , being one o f the clearer examples of borrowing between languages . Both in Russian and in Hebrew , by this word we refer to one’s attitude towards the remains of the dead, maintained according to ancient traditions. קבר – kever is nominative in Hebrew for grave , and according to Jewish tradition a fter visiting the cemetery, one is required to wash hands in order to clean the filth . Moreover, men of the priestly clan ( Kagans in Russian or Kohanim in Hebrew) are even prohibited to enter a cemetery. From the Hebrew קבר - k eve r , therefore, came the Russian c кверна - skverna - filth , by adding the prefix “ c” -with. К рохи - krohi - Crumbs According to Vasmer , крохи mean crumbs, grains . If so, th is word may originate from the Hebrew term for a loaf of bread - כרח לחם - kerah lehem . The Hebrew kerah may serve as origin for the Russ ian kroha – k роха , mean ing something very smal l . Indeed this refers to something small of any kind , not only bread, but may have originally been used in reference to bread crumbs. Ш ельма - shelyma - Smart guy King Solomon is biblically and historically noted for his wisdom s. In Hebrew his name is Shlomo - Шл o м o . With ti me , the original Shlomo may have transformed to the Russian s helyma . Habalka - хабалка I originally encountered this word in the writings of the modern Russian author Bykov , uncertain of its meaning at the time. An possible explanation was later offered to me, stating that хабалка meant a woman with a dangerous character. In Hebrew we have the word חבלה - habala – diversion , and it would be prude not to wonder whether these were connected in some way. Б отать по Фене ( from argo - thieves' slang ) - botaty po fene - To speak This means to speak in thieves' slang - argo , where the first word in th e expressio n is straightforward: Botat y comes from בוטא - bote or מבטא mewate - expressing or speaking in Hebrew. As to f en e : V asmer believes th at it originated in Ofen ya , a car t in the slang of itinerant traders travelling through Russian villages in the past . Ofenya obviously comes from the Hebrew אופן - o p han - wheel . З абацать ( argo slang )- zabatsaty - Make money The root of this Russian slang word is баца - batsa . In Hebrew בצע - betsa mea n s lucre both in Biblical times and t o day . It is unclear how this Hebrew word transformed into Russian. There is a Yiddish word batsab - בעצב , that originated in Hebrew and could be a possible origin to the Russian , however the second b that is found in the Yiddish term, is lacking in the Argo root. For this reason, the dire ct borrowing from Hebrew to Argo is preferable , in my opinion, to using the Yiddish as an intermediate. How this transformed is discussed in our previous book. Кащей - kashyey - Kashyey This obscure Russian name belongs to a very negative fabled person from a fairy tale , and becomes apparent through Hebrew. קשה - kashe - means heavy, oppressive and so on, corresponding with the legendary Кащей - kashyey . К велить - kv elit y - Bringing to tears K велить - kvelity means bringing to tears in Russian slang . קבילות - kv ilot , in Hebrew means complaints . Ш ататься - shatatysya - To wander the streets לשוטט – leshotet , in Hebrew is literally to wander the streets . There is no connection with the value of instability which is the second meaning for шататься . К ресло - kreslo - Armchair כרס - keres - be lly already appeared in our work in connection with a beautiful maiden. Keres lo - כרס לו means he has a belly , possibly leading to the Hebrew term for כורסא , an armchair . Vasmer discusses this word at length, yet gives no clue as to its origin . Н а халяву - na khalyavu - For free The word khaliva - חליבה exists since medieval Hebrew and means milking . This Russian expression , with Hebrew its root , seems to have entered modern Hebrew, giving the corresponding meaning to the ancient verb to milk - לחלוב - lakhlov . F iguratively , this means to use someone's financial capabilities to one’s own advantage. Ш ут , шутить - shut, shutity - Jester, joke V asmer mentions linguists who link the origin of the Russian шут - shut - jester with the Hebrew שוטה - shote – moro n , while consequently disagreeing with this link in light of the antiquity of the Russian word. For those who are familiar with the Khazar -Slavic connection, causing the inclusion of Hebrew even long before the 7 th century, the antiquity of the word is not a challenge to this link . О хмурить - okhmurity - To fool O хмурить ¬̶ is to deceive, to cheat, to make a fool , even view another as a kind of Ass . Ass in Hebrew חמור ̶ hamor . Turning another into a supposed ass could be " ohamorit y " , transforming into okhmurity - O хмурить . Х апать и хапануть – khapaty , kh apanut y - Seize and grab According to V a s mer , a word came from Old German. We , however, suggest that the origin lies in the Hebrew ver b חפן ̶ k hafan . Means to pinch or grasp , dating to the early middle ages in the Mishnah. From here, k hapanut y probably came about, gradually becoming grab . In modern Hebrew, the word חופן - khophen - a handful is still in use since then. Even Shoshan , author a famous Hebrew dictionary , connects it with the Ak k adian uppanu - to grab with the palm . It is interesting to note that k hafan - חפן is a combination of two Hebrew words: k haf - kaf – כף - palm and fan -pan - פן - side or face . Hence, it may literally mean hold your face in your palms . The word khaf - kaf – palm and its action create d the Russian verb хапать - khapaty . С волочь и шваль - svoloch , shvaly - Bastard and Tras h There are etymological publications linking bastard with garbage dumped in a pit, as an intermediate to the word trash . T he meaning of these words is , however, different and may be viewed in a figurative sense of the etimology . How did this come about ? We offer a possible link between the Hebrew word סבל – sevel - suffering and scum . One c ausing sevel (suffering) is a bastard . The Russian syllable och is added to the sevel which, pronounced together quickly, may have transformed into svoloch – сволочь - bastard in Russian . As for trash , according to V asmer , this is an ancient tailor , or the name of a Novgorod merchant from the 17 th century , Ivashka Shvali . In both versions ( which, by the way, can be reduced to one ) , it is interesting to note a possible connection with Hebrew through the word שובל - shoval , which in Russian means a train in ladies' dresses . Л узгать - luzgaty - To nibble The Russian verb is c omposed of two Hebrew words : Luz - לוּז - walnut tree , and Gat - גת - in which was the ancient site for extracting oil by crushing olives. Instead of olives , in ancient Russia nuts and seeds were the commodity, but the essence remains. Сорока и сурок – soroka and surok - Magpie and marmot The question of how such different animals own similar names in Russian , may be that both animals whistle. To whistle in Hebrew is שרוק - shrok . Sh may have become S , and the names of the animals arrived through Hebrew . T his case may be e specially intriguing since it connects the Slavic names with places inhabited by Slavic people , also home the Magpie and marmot . South Russia and the Ukrai ne may be such place , where the Khazars were located as well . Явь , явление , явиться - yavy , yavlenie , yavitsya - Reality, phenomenon, appear Linked and possibly derived from the Hebrew te r m יבוא - y av o ! - come in! . Shmenka from Y. Aleshkovsky - ш менка ( argo - thieves' slang) - shmenka "Get your shib ka and shmenka ." The meaning of the shmenka is unclea r, pe rhaps referring to some amount of money to start with, שמן - shemen - in Hebrew oil and grease . Maybe the shmenka was intended to lubricate difficulties with certain p ersonnel - leshamen in modern Hebrew . К урить - kurity - To smoke In Aramaic, כורא - kura - means to make a fire . In Hebrew, starting with the prophet Ezekiel , כור - kur is a hearth . Fires in a hearth gave origins to Russian verb for smoking - курить - kurity . Е т е р - ye t e r - All other A ccording to V asmer ет е р - yet e r means some, someone . In Hebrew יתר - y et e r means - everything else or all ot h ers . The connection is clear : everything else is something else or someone or some . Ц инк о вый ( argo - thieves' slang ) – tsink o viy - Sentry in prison According to Grachev (see list of publications in “ Russian Hebrew and The Khazar story” ) , цинк о вый - ts i nkoviy means a s entry in prison . In Hebrew צינוק - tsin o k – prison cell . А смоед ( argo - thieves' slang ) – a smo ed - Prison food - lender In Russian prison food was a type of currency. A p rison food - lender was in the position of a moneylender in the out -of- prison world . Argo named this person асмоед - а smoe d . There are no Russian etymologies published by Vasmer concerning this name. In Hebrew אסם - as am is a food warehouse. The s uffi x ед came from еда -food in Russian , while асмоед - а smoed is a person that eats from אסם - as a m - a food warehouse . В ира - v ira ( argo ) - Murder – Вира - vira is a m urder ( Grachev ). In Hebrew עבירה - avir a – is an offense . Hence, e ven in thieves' slang , a murder i s an offen s e . Ч ерта - cherta - Stria, notch- Vasmer mentions proto Slavic - certti and ancient Indian - kartti . If th is is correct, th is may be joint word with ancient Hebrew based on the ro ot סרט - srt - to notch and a nd the word סריטה - srita that means exactly- черта - cherta . Based on the same con sonants in all these words. Т ворить - tvority - С reate The R ussian творить - tvority and Hebrew ברא - b a ra corre late . F or tvority the only etymologies presented by Vasmer are Slavic words. For bara , etymological correlations exist ( according to the Even Shoshan Dictionary ) in Aramaic and Arabic , as well as in the Bible . Tvor and bra both have similar root components - vr in Russian , br in Hebrew . The b could have change to v , the ma in difference is the t in the first consonant of the Russian word. To this, we may suggest the following: in Aramaic language there is the prefix ד -d , which adds the meaning of belong ing to the following word. Dvara - דברא – , therefore means created in Aramaic (and was earlier presented in the passage concerning Abrakadabra ). Further, it contains a similar phonetic form as the Russian T v a ry-tvorenie - творение , i.e. DVR and TVR. One cannot help wonder , therefore, about the possible connection between ancient P rotoslavs and Aramaic speakers . П одавно , П оздний и П одлец - podavno,pozdniy , podlets - Even more so, late and scoundrel Let us open with the ending: Scoundrel- подлец , may be similarly suggested as in the main text of " Hebrew, Russian and Khazars Story " . a scoundrel - подлец could be the result of adding po+ делец - hustler . Po - פ ה - here + businessman . Vasm er offers no enlightening interpretation here, rather links it with either near or long . However, a companion to joint business does not always act as a scoundrel in Russian , but could also be a friend - tovarish - товарищ . Late - поздний - pozdniy This word contains three components: po + z + d niy . Po - פה – here , comes from Hebrew פה . Z a - за – after . The Russian pr e ffix за is removed in this word . D niy - дний - days is a Russian word дни with the suffix й for the adjective formation. It therefore creates здесь за днями - here after days - late - поздний . . In Vasmer's etymological explanation for поздний , the connection with the ancestors of today's past and passe is interesting , yet it cannot be ruled out that the word has several distinct roots which eventually created the final version. Even more so- подавно - podavno is a result of pairing the Hebrew Po - פה – here with the Russian давно - davno -long ago. Here long ago therefore means here in the meaning of at this time , or here in the meaning of long ago , or perhaps always , leading to the meaning – as always, which is - подавно - pod a vno in Russian. . Religious terminology and more . In the following, we will discuss s everal Russian words derived from T he Testaments and L etters of Paul. Е сьм - yesym - To exist- From letter to the Corinthians : ” На благодатию Божию есьм то, что есьм .” "By the grace of God, we are what we are ." In the Hebrew version we find the word ישים - yasim , m eaning to take place in reality, to be realized . A number of Indo-European and Semitic languages ​​have words similar in sound and meaning (is, ist , yesh ) . We can therefore assume that there was some common Proto - origin for this word , or a borrowing between Pr o -Indo-European and Pr o - S emitic in their earlier stage s . Simultaneously , as far as the Slavic есьм - yesym is considered , it is difficult to deny its appearance in connection with the Hebrew ישים - yasim , holding a very similar same sound and meaning. Т щетно - tshyetno - In vain - In Hebrew there is the verb התיש - hetish - to exhaust , to nullify all efforts . T he Russian in vain therefore appears to have phonetic roots in the sound tsh - тщетно - tshyetno , perhaps owing to the bilingual nature of the Slavic speakers in Khazaria . О реол - oreol - Aureole Vasmer omits this word from his Dictionary . Other e tymological d ictionaries connect it to the Latin word for gold . In Hebrew אור יעל - or yaal mean s rising light or shining . Could it be aureole ? In Russian, at least, this is the precise meaning of o реол - oreol , such that, for instance, ancient Icons of Rublev ( 1410 AD) depicted saints with ring s of light shining o ver their heads. Perhaps this is how Rublev named this phenomen on. Или , Или ! Лама савахтани ?!-Ili, Ili ! Lama savakhtani ? - My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? (The Gospel of Matthew). The se are last words of Jesus , i n Hebrew: אלי , אלי ! למה סבכתני ! - Eli, Eli! Lama s avakhtani ? - My God, my God! Wh y have you got me into! We do not know why the Russian version of the Bible prefers Ili, Ili to Eli, Eli as in the original . Perhaps this variation hints to an intermediate step between Hebrew and Russian. Others etymologies prefer Aramaic as the origin to this phrase , where savakhtani is translated to forsaken rather than got into as in Hebrew. The phrase has different meanings in these different languages. Aramaic was widely spoken back then , although Jesus was likely fluent in Hebrew a s well . Let us highlight a few interesting points . First, this phrase apparently holds such importance that future copies in different languages cite it in its natural language with subsequent explanations. Second, Jesus addresses God while essentially creating a distinction between Him and himself. That is, the trinit y does not appear to final, if it does exist at all as this point . Finally, "Wh y have you got me into ? !" in the Hebrew translation refers to the great suffering in the last moments o f Jesus’ human existence. Лоно Авраамово - lono avraamovo - Abraham’s side Th e Russian lono comes from Luke 16:22 “The time came when the beggar died and the angels carried him to Abraham’s side. ” In Russian , however , lono does not mean side . The human organ mentioned by Vasmer and others is h a rdly suitable here. Rather, the wo rd is likely associated with the Hebrew ver b לן - lan - sle ep and mean ing a place of sleep . Гора Елион - gora elion - Mount Elion Mount Elion is mentioned in Acts. In Hebrew , הר עליון is Har Elion - Гора Елион - gora elion - Mount Elion . This is a fine example for the transformation of the sound " h " into the Russian " g ". Акельдама - Akeldama - Akeldama The place called Akeldama is interpreted as the land of blood . In Hebrew, היכל דם - h eik h al dam - palace of blood . С идеть Одесную - sidety odesnuyu - To sit on the righ t hand of God In Orthodoxy, this phrase means to sit with God on the throne of government . Odessnaya most likely comes from the Hebrew הדס - adas , the tree, or branches that may have fanned J esus in the entrance to Jerusalem . הדס - adas in Russian is мирт - myrtle . Myrtle was one of the symbols and indispensable attributes of Christian holidays. The frescoes of the Ipatiev Monastery depict the scene where Christ presents the myrtle bouquet to the Mother of God. In Greek and Roman tradition, myrtle wreaths were worn on the heads of young wives and heroes. И скушать - iskushaty - To tempt It is not connected, in our opinion, with eating only ( кушать - kushaty -to eat ) , but may be also linked to the Hebrew היקשה - h iksh a - made it difficult - искушать - iskushaty . At least for religious texts. С моковница - smokovnitsa - Fig tree Similar to Czech smokva and a number of other Slavic words, this is like ly associated with a fi g tree , as mentioned by Vasmer , thought he does not offer an explanation for this link . Figs turn red under the influence of the sun. הסמיק - hism i k - means blushed . Consequently, the Hebrew root סמק – смк - smk was the likely origin to fig tree - смоковница - smok o vnitsa in Russian as well in other languages. Hence смаковать - smakov a ty -to relish , or in the noun form- смак - smak -gusto. Анания - ananiya - Haninah Анания - ananiya is Biblical name , derived from חנניה – Hananiah , which Hebrew also mean s merciful . Е ресь - yeresy - Heresy In our opinion, th is word is associated with the Hebrew ארס - e res - poison , rather than being a derivative from the Greek choice , as in Vasmer ’s Dictionary . У зы , узник , узкий - uzhi , uznik , uzkiy - Ties, prisoner, narrow Vasmer link s prisoner with bonds , while the word narrow has no link to the previous two in his Dictionary , rather connecting the latter with a Russian origin. We , however, believe that they all may be linked to the word узкий - uzkiy - narrow . In Hebrew we find the verb עזוק - azok - to tie the limbs , as well as עזוק - az u k - fettered, limited in freedom of movement . From this узкий uzkiy - narrow was therefore derived . Shackles in modern Hebrew is azikim - עזיקים - узы - u zhi . Saul- Савл - Savl "A young man named Saul tormented the church." Saul is Hebrew is שאול - Shaul , the name of the first king of Israe l, as well as the Hebrew name of Paul . In Russian Christianity , however, he is called Савл - Savl , possible due to t o first Russian Christians w commandment of Hebrew , who deliberately chose to alter the name from Saul to Savl , meaning Hebrew סבל - s e vel – torment , hinting to the one who tormented Christians . From Saul-Paul we find Pavel - Павел in Russian. Глагол Божий - glagol bojiy - The say of God Vasmer has no non-Slavic etymologies for gologolit y - глаголить - speak , glas - гл ас - spoken and golos - голос -voice associated with th is v erb. If turning to Hebrew, we may associate the Russian idiom Глагол Божий i.e. The say of God with the Hebrew phrase Gala Kol beYahweh - גלה קול ביהווה - Gala Kol beYahwe . יהווה - yahwe - Jehovah - Иегова is one of God’s names . Gala Kol means proclaimed . Beyahwe means by God . Combined, we have one proclaimed in the name of God ( Yahwe ) . The sounds " k " and " g " can vary. And Gala Kol may alternately be read as glagol - глагол . The Bible in its Russian version knew Yahwe - Jehovah as Иегова . B eJehovah can be pronounced as beezhova , from here bojevo , or in the n ominative- bojiy - Божий . F r om here , perhaps comes Боже , which is God in Russian. С арга - s arga - Strips of bark According to V asmer сарга - sarga is a gray cloth or strips of bark for weaving fine shoes. In Hebrew , סרג - sarag - weave. T he origin of this word is therefore quite clearly H ebrew. Край ( одежды )- kray - Edge of (clothing) This word likely originates in the Hebrew קריעה - kriah - break or קרוע - karua - torn . This may be true also for the Russian кроить - kro i ty - to cut of the cloth . The eye and the letter O. Concerning the possible link between the word and the letter – There are two Russian words for Eye , one of them being Oko . In his Dictionary, Vasmer places the ancient Indian aksi a s the sourse of Ok o , in addition to mentioning Slavic connections for the letter O . In the first Proto-Hebrew and Phoenician alphabets, the sign O is named a in - עין . Ain is translated into Russian as an eye - глаз - glaz or Oko . The origin of the O letter sign is found in the Egyptian hieroglyph depicting an eye with a pupil point within . Over time, the point was omitted from alphabet , and the letter became rounded, while retaining its Hebrew name ain - עין – Eye - Oko . Cyril and Methodius, the creators of Russian writing, were apparenely familiar with ancient alphabets and used them in the creation of the Cyrillic alphabet. They may have used the Russian name of the eye - Oko , using the shape of eye for the letter O , vocalized as - O , a s well as the Hebrew word ain - eye has been used for the name of the letter ע . In addition to the letter O , the uppercase small letter b is suspiciously similar to the Proto-Semitic counterparts of ancient alphabetic records , rather than to Greek and Latin alphabetic counterparts . . П одавно - podavno - Even more so According to the compilation approach, по - po - פה - here , but can als o be used for at th at moment ( po bemakom ) . Also - davno - давно - means a long time ago. At t hat moment a long time ago therefore appears to be the primary origin to the Russian word п одавно - podavno - . From it , the wider meaning of even more so later came . Vasmer , however, holds that this is a native Russian word. П од -pod - Under The prefix под -pod is one of central s in Russian , used to compile a set of words, e.g. crush, adjust, crawl, subject , etc. We suggest that is may be connected with the Hebrew פה - po - here . Following are several words formed with под - pod as a product of compilation. По + down + лезть - под лезть -crawl up По + down + лить - под лить - add liquid По + down + лежащее - под лежащее - subject Etc . As to how English entered this compilation - down is taken from English for show , and did not actually enter Russian. However, we may suppose that down ha s a nearer origin or relative where the Proto-Slavs and English people ancestors lived. And, indeed, in Latin exists the word de , which similar to the English down , means down . On another note, the Aramaic prefix ד - d may be the origin of the d in the compound word po + d = pod = under . In Aramaic , ד - d means belonging , similar to Russian - on the basis , according to . We may also choose to remain with the Anglo-Latin variant and assume the existence of a common origin similar to the Latin de , in which case t hen the combination of Hebrew or West Semitic po - פה - here with Latin de - below turns into a Russian под -pod- under or sub . To conclude, so far we have been able to list several Russian prefixes and prepositions origina ting in ancient links with Hebrew and other West Semitic languages: при , по , вы , под . В -v - In- Another important preposition (prefix) is " в -v ". For example, в комнате - in a room or в нутри - in side . In Hebrew and a number of West Semitic languages ​​ – this prefix is ב - b, v . Occasionally, it has a hard sou nd - b , while occasionally sounding soft er - v , as in Russian. In Indo-European linguistics, there are two main explanations: it is believed that the Proto-Slavs added " v " to the Indo-European " n " and received the Old Russian " vn ", or th at " vn " was already present in the Indo-European proto-language. Eventually , the British as well as oth er s Europeans developed " in " in addition to other combinations of " n ", while the Slavs remained with " v " voicing . Clear evidence of such a development is hard to find , but supposing this is tru e, why did Slavs choose " v "? Perhaps it was due to the Semitic world around them, in which ב - b or v w as the prefix в – v- inside , etc. W h ere did the name of S lavs - Славяне - slav y ane - c o me from? Я не - y ane is understandable: a suffix like они - oni that means they . T he reader will easily find explanations of the origin for Slav in various etymologies and variety of opinions. Neither, however, reach final conclusions. Let us therefore suggest another option, based on the Hebrew-Semitic borrowings in Slavic Russian speech presented in this work and earlier in the book "Hebrew, Russian and the Khazar story " . Some of the prefixes are difficult to explain based on the relatively short and late influence of J udaism on the population of Khazaria , as previously discussed. The Jewish tradition in Middle Age writings defined the Slavic spe e ch as a Canaanite language and named the area of the Slav ’ s settlement Canaan . The incentive behind this is unclear, and raises questions concerning the motive, or perhaps even ignorance of the Jewish scribes in doing so. Today, we know that one of the Egyptian names for the population and territory of the Levant was kn"n , ( around late 2 nd and early 1 st millennium BC ) . We also have a significant amount of historical records and archeology concerning this period and area, in which lived Canaanites, the peoples of the sea, Phoenicians, Jews, Israelites, Arameans as well as captive of Egyptians, Hittites, Assyrians, Babylonians , Persians and G r eeks during different periods of the 2 nd and 1 st millennia BC. During most of this time , writing already exist ed : first - cuneiform and hieroglyphs, then - alphabetical. Current researchers read and decryp t these writing . It turns out , that not only Sumerians and Akkad ian s lived in Mesopotamia and its environs , rather that f or most of the 2 nd millennium BC, an additional population known as Amo rites existed alongside them. The Amorites lived a mainly nomadic lifestyle, as shepherds, but also took part in the urban population. They even occasionally seized power over Akkadian cities and founded dynasties such as Hammurabi in Babylon ( who was not the actual founder, but clearly the most famous representative of t his dynasty). Amorite language differed Akkadian. A dditionally we had Semitic o f the West Semitic group, which also di ff ered from the A k k adian - East Semitic according to linguists . The places of residence of Amorites were in between South ern part of Mesopotamia and the North ern -West of Mesopotamia, and there are scholars who interpret the name of the Amorites as similar to the name of a d istrict i n the west of Mesopotamia. This is today's Levant , AKA Canaan, as indicated in the Egyptian papyri. On another note , the Old Testament mentions a victory of Joshua over the king of the Amorites , there described as tall and strong men . T here can therefore be little doubt that they lived in Canaan , and perhaps even spoke the Canaanite language, an ancestor of modern Hebrew. We also know that the Amorites were not a small local tribe, but a large and diverse population spread over the entire Fertile Crescent from the South to the Nor t h - west. There they were in close contact with both the Hittites and the peoples of the sea and Hurrians, some of whom were of Indo-European languages roots. The striking fact is , that their name is associated with the Hebrew word אמור - emor - say . The semantic connection between Russian слово -word and אמור – emor -say is similar to the connection between the names of the population groups Славяне - Slavs and Amorites אמורים . Is this accidental? Did the Amorites switch to the Slavic language and replace their name with the corresponding Slavic word? Or reversely, did the Slavic tribe name itself in Sl avic people of words, following the example of the Amorites? A s imilar phenomena of nam ing in foreign language is found in other languages ​​and sometimes called calque . An example of another Slavic calque is mentioned below, all the more interesting since it was born and apparently distributed among the Slavic scholars or writers during the per iod of Russian writing culture origins . Ч итать и считать - chitaty , s’chitaty - Read and count The meanings of these words are clear. It is also clear that i n Russia n, both are based on читать – to read . V asmer and other specialists in Russian etymology do not recognize see any foreign connections other than to the Slavic worl d . One could assume, given the flourishing of reading and possibly counting that the word читать - chitaty - to read was created by Cyril and Methodius, two Greek monks who gave Russia the alphabet s , or at least adapted it from Gree k . This h owever cannot be the case, otherwise we sh ould have read the corresponding version in all Slavic etymologies. If we c arry out our previous idea concerning contacts of Slavs with West Semitic languages, we will find in Hebrew a root that concerns two sim i lar objects as in Russian language - books ( subject s of reading) and c ount . This root ספר - sfr serves an origin for words: -סופר sof e r - writer , ספר - s e fer - book and a verb סופר - sof e r - to count . Its etymology points to Akkadian- saparu - to write . It can be concluded from archeolog ical evidence concerning the development of writing , where the first meaning for sfr based words was - to mark and count and books has been developed later. Among Slavs, the process was obviously going in o ppositive direction by adding the prefix c - s - with to the word читать - chitaty - read . Thus, we may conclude that Russian holds a calqued example from other language , produc ing считать - s’chitaty from an already existing part of the pair читать - chitaty -read . Therefore, an existence of reading in Slavs society and a Slavic word for a meaning to read - читать – chitaty before Cyril’s alphabet seems to be proven . Slavs could possibl y read Greek, Latin, Iranian, Arabic. However, knowing they were part of the Kazar’s world in which rulers accepted Jewish religion, we may deduce that they were using Hebrew as well . That is why the calque Read and count- читать и считать - chitaty , s’chitaty could be copied from Hebrew book and count- sefer and sofer . This is also why it may be possible to find such footprints of direct translations from Hebrew texts to Russian . I think most professionals may will reject the above explanation. I beg to differ . First, this provides a comprehensive explanation to the early appearance of Hebrew borrowings in the Slavic languages , as well as to the medieval Jewish definition of the Slavs as Canaanites. Seco nd , so far, a relatively small amount cuneiforms texts have been read and, perhaps, years of future research will shed new light on the topic . F inally , t he Slavs had a written language even before Cyril and Methodius. Memories of the " черты и резы - lines and cuts " of th e s e writing s are part of Russian history. Several dozens of these records were published by I. L. Kuzlasov in his book "Runic Writings of the Eurasian Steppes" (Moscow. "Eastern Literature", 1994) Geographically, some of these writ ing were found in areas of the Khazar world (North Caucasus, Don, South and Middle Volga) and Southwestern Siberia. With regard to the Khazar writing, I. L. Kyzlasov is of the opinion that this is was an alphabetic writing of a previously unknown Proto-Sinai alphabet. That may be one of the earliest alphabets, examples of which variations were found in Sinai. Kyzlasov does not consider a question of how this alphabet got to the regions of southern Russia, the Don and the Volga in the 8-10th centuries AD, while the time and place of its creation and distribution should be implied in the 13-11th centuries BC in the Sinai or Levant region. Only the migration of languages ​​and peoples c ould sufficiently explain the appearance of this alphabet on the Don and Volga , two thousand years after its creation in the Middle East. The decoding of these inscriptions has not yet been made at a sufficiently substantiated level.