# Balashon Articles (8)

## arnona
https://www.balashon.com/2011/03/arnona.html

Saturday, March 05, 2011 arnona We previously discussed blo בלו , a tax first mentioned in the book of Ezra. Blo is mentioned together with two other taxes that are not used in modern Hebrew: minda מנדה and halach הלך. The three terms are discussed in Bava Batra 8a, and halach is identified as arnona ארנונא. Arnona (as ארנונה) is certainly familiar to Israelis today - it's municipal tax determined by the size of the property. However, in Talmudic times it was an agricultural tax (originally on grain, then extended to land, cattle, and clothing ). Then, as now, it was not particularly loved, and this can be sensed in the etymology as well. We've mentioned before that although the Jews of the Talmudic period (in the Land of Israel) were under Roman rule, almost all the foreign words in Talmudic Hebrew were from Greek. The exceptions are almost always related to the military. Arnona is an adaptation of the Latin annona (the Hebrew equivalent אנונא or אנונה is found in Midrash Rabbah), meaning "yearly produce", from annus , "year" (as in the word " annual "). Steinsaltz comments that troops passing through an area would collect food as part of the arnona tax, and this is perhaps a connection to the Biblical halach ("walking"). A question I've been asked in the past is, "Why is the Jerusalem neighborhood Arnona called that? Why would they name a neighborhood after a tax?" Well, there are two theories about the origin of the name - neither of which is connected to the tax. One is that it is named for the Arnon river in Jordan, which empties into the Dead Sea, which is visible from the neighborhood. The other theory is that it was named for the the daughter of the scholar Ben-Zion Luria, Arnona , who was herself named for the river. The river, Nachal Arnon נחל ארנון - is mentioned a number of times in the Tanach, and some say gets its name from its noisy nature (the root רנן means to be loud, either in joy or in complaint). Tweet Pin It Posted by Balashon at 11:35 PM Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest No comments: Post a Comment Newer Post Older Post Home Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom) Search all Balashon posts About this site I'm a native English speaker, but live in Israel and love the Hebrew language. On this site I investigate Hebrew - Biblical, Talmudic, Medieval and Modern - including slang; related languages like Aramaic, Arabic, Akkadian and Yiddish; and how foreign languages like Greek, Latin and English have entered Hebrew - and how Hebrew has affected those languages as well. I discuss the meanings of words, with a focus on etymology. Please feel free to leave a note in the comments or send me an email . I can't promise to reply to every email, but your questions might lead to a future post! Who is Balashon? ?למה לא בעברית Balashon on Facebook Balashon on X (Twitter) Subscribe to Balashon by email Get new posts by email: Subscribe You&#8217;ll confirm your subscription on Blogtrottr. Powered by Blogtrottr

---

## blo
https://www.balashon.com/2011/02/blo.html

Sunday, February 27, 2011 blo Lately there has been a lot of news about the proposed increase (and subsequent decrease) in Israel's excise tax on gasoline. Until I looked into it, I did not know what an excise tax was. According to Wikipedia, it differs from custom duties: An excise tax is one levied on specific goods or commodities produced or sold within a country, or on licenses granted for specific activities. Excises are distinguished from customs duties, which are taxes on importation. Excises are inland taxes, whereas customs duties are border taxes. and is also different than sales tax: an excise is distinguished from a sales tax or VAT in three ways: (i) an excise typically applies to a narrower range of products; (ii) an excise is typically heavier, accounting for higher fractions (sometimes half or more) of the retail prices of the targeted products; and (iii) an excise is typically specific (so much per unit of measure; e.g. so many cents per gallon), whereas a sales tax or VAT is ad valorem, i.e. proportional to value (a percentage of the price in the case of a sales tax, or of value added in the case of a VAT). But what really confused me was the name for excise in Hebrew- blo בלו. I thought it was likely a foreign word - perhaps a mispronunciation of one. So I was certainly surprised to find out that the word is actually biblical! It appears, together with other types of taxes, in the Aramaic section of the Book of Ezra (4:13,20; 7:24). The Daat Mikra explains b'lo there as a type of food tax. In Bava Batra 8a, the gemara identifies blo as a capitation tax (tax per person). Klein, perhaps influenced by the gemara, says the biblical meaning is "poll tax." How it came to mean "excise" in Modern Hebrew is unclear to me (Ben Yehuda does not have an entry for the word at all.) As far as the etymology is concerned, Klein writes that it is of unknown origin, and the Daat Mikra says it is perhaps from Persian. However, others say that it derives from the Akkadian biltu - "tribute, gift" (from the verb wabalu , "to bring"), which may be related to the Hebrew root יבל meaning "to bear, carry, conduct". This is would be equivalent to the word masa משא, which can mean both "carrying, burden" as well as "tribute, present", and derives from the root נשא, meaning "to bear, carry" as well. From יבל, we get the word yevul יבול - "produce, yield" (according to Klein, literally "that which is brought in or gathered in") and hovala הובלה - "transport". Klein also mentions a few more words which perhaps also derive from the root יבל: mabul מבול - "flood". He quotes Gesenius as saying that it derives from יבל meaning "to flow". Others say it comes from נבל, to destroy. yabelet יבלת - "wart". He writes that perhaps it literally means "a running sore". yovel יובל - "jubilee". As we've previously discussed , before it meant jubilee, it meant "ram". Klein writes that it probably derives from יבל, and originally meant "leader of the flock, bellwether". ( Thi

---

## ish and isha
https://www.balashon.com/2008/10/ish-and-isha.html

Friday, October 17, 2008 ish and isha Categories: dropped nuns , kinship terms , Parashat Bereishit , Parashat Chukat , Parashat Vezot Habracha The first words the Torah quotes Adam as saying appear right after his wife was created. He gives her a name, but also mentions a connection between his name and hers: ו&#1463;י&#1468;&#1465;אמ&#1462;ר, ה&#1464;א&#1464;ד&#1464;ם, ז&#1465;את ה&#1463;פ&#1468;&#1463;ע&#1463;ם ע&#1462;צ&#1462;ם מ&#1461;ע&#1458;צ&#1464;מ&#1463;י, ו&#1468;ב&#1464;ש&#1474;&#1464;ר מ&#1460;ב&#1468;&#1456;ש&#1474;&#1464;ר&#1460;י; ל&#1456;ז&#1465;את י&#1460;ק&#1468;&#1464;ר&#1461;א א&#1460;ש&#1468;&#1473;&#1464;ה, כ&#1468;&#1460;י מ&#1461;א&#1460;יש&#1473; ל&#1467;ק&#1456;ח&#1464;ה-ז&#1468;&#1465;את. Then the man said, "This one at last is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh. This one shall be called Woman ( isha ) for from man ( ish ) she was taken". (Bereshit 2:23) As you might imagine, I love the idea that the first recorded human sentence include an etymology! Ibn Ezra says that the words ish איש and isha אשה are related, and Rashi goes even further. Based on the midrash in Bereshit Rabba (18:4), he says that from this verse we learn that the world was created in Hebrew! However, there are a few difficulties with what we've said so far. First of all, almost all modern linguists say that ish and isha aren't related. Ish comes from the root אוש, meaning strength (the related root אשש means "to strengthen"), and isha derives from אנש, meaning weak. (The common plural of both - anashim אנשים - "men" and nashim - נשים - "women" also derive from אנש). Aside from the fact that the Torah mentions them together, it might seem difficult to believe that they aren't from the same root. We see the letter heh added as a feminine suffix in many words. Why shouldn't we accept what appears to be the obvious etymology here as well? Well, first of all, we should be careful of "obvious" etymologies. I've warned a number of times of the danger of assuming that words in English and Hebrew that have similar sounds and meanings are related. But we need to be just as careful when it comes to words in the same language. My friend Mike Gerver has a list of false cognates in English, with pairs of words that most people would find it hard to believe aren't from the same root: for example, pull and pulley , isle and island . I would add to this list one very relevant to our topic: male and female ! Secondly, it's important to note the the woman is receiving a name here. We see many times that the etymology of names given in the Torah does not match up exactly with the linguistic etymologies. For example, the Torah connects the name Noach נח with the root נחם, even though the two aren't connected. (For a good analysis of this phenomenon, read this post on Parshablog.) But perhaps most significantly, there's a grammatical problem here as well. The word isha has a dagesh in the shin . Ibn Ezra says this is to distinguish it from the homonym ishah -"her hu

---

## why not in hebrew?
https://www.balashon.com/2008/05/why-not-in-hebrew.html

Thursday, May 15, 2008 why not in hebrew? (This post is explaining why this site is not written in Hebrew). לפעמים שואלים אותי, "אם אתה כותב על לשון העברית, למה האתר לא בעברית?" יש שתי סיבות: א) למרות שאני אוהב ללמוד על עברית, ויש לי נסיון בכתיבה בעברית, יש לי עדיין הרבה טעויות, בדקדוק ובאיות. אני חושש שהשגיאות האלה יסיחו את דעתו של הקורא מתוכן המאמר. ב) אני כותב הרבה על השינויים של משמעויות של מילים בעברית במשך הדורות. קשה מאד לעשות את זה בכתיבה בעברית, כי אז לא ברור אם אני מדבר על המילה או על המושג. קחו את המאמר הזה לדוגמא. אני טוען שמה שקוראים "חורף" היום זה בעצם סתיו, ו-"סתיו" הוא חורף. הרבה יותר קל לעשות את זה באנגלית, שבה אני יכול להגיד ש: While today stav means "autumn", originally it referred to winter בעברית זה היה "היום סתיו זה סתיו אבל במקור היה חורף" רואים את הקושי? אז אני מתנצל לאלה שקשה להם באנגלית, אבל אני מניח בסוף גם הם ילמדו משהו על העברית... Tweet Pin It Posted by DLC at 11:34 AM Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest No comments: Post a Comment Newer Post Older Post Home Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom) Search all Balashon posts About this site I'm a native English speaker, but live in Israel and love the Hebrew language. On this site I investigate Hebrew - Biblical, Talmudic, Medieval and Modern - including slang; related languages like Aramaic, Arabic, Akkadian and Yiddish; and how foreign languages like Greek, Latin and English have entered Hebrew - and how Hebrew has affected those languages as well. I discuss the meanings of words, with a focus on etymology. Please feel free to leave a note in the comments or send me an email . I can't promise to reply to every email, but your questions might lead to a future post! Who is Balashon? ?למה לא בעברית Balashon on Facebook Balashon on X (Twitter) Subscribe to Balashon by email Get new posts by email: Subscribe You&#8217;ll confirm your subscription on Blogtrottr. Powered by Blogtrottr Categories (for many of the posts) body parts (11) books (18) chanukah (12) colors (14) continents (4) directions (6) dropped nuns (11) food (64) hebrew letters (22) hebrew numbers (10) holiday (5) kinship terms (12) Kohelet (2) Kohelet words (21) kri and ktiv (6) Lag BaOmer (7) legal terms (6) Parashat Achrei Mot (2) Parashat Balak (4) Parashat Bamidbar (3) Parashat Bechukotai (2) Parashat Behaalotcha (6) Parashat Behar (2) Parashat Bereishit (11) Parashat Beshalach (11) Parashat Bo (13) Parashat Chayei Sarah (5) Parashat Chukat (6) Parashat Devarim (7) Parashat Ekev (8) Parashat Emor (11) Parashat Ha&#39;azinu (4) Parashat Kedoshim (2) Parashat Ki Tavo (5) Parashat Ki Tetze (7) Parashat Ki Tisa (7) Parashat Korach (5) Parashat Lech Lecha (10) Parashat Masei (3) Parashat Matot (5) Parashat Metzora (2) Parashat Miketz (12) Parashat Mishpatim (11) Parashat Naso (6) Parashat Noach (19) Parashat Pekudei (3) Parashat Pinchas (10) Parashat Re&#39;eh (10) Parashat Shelach (5) Parashat Shemini (8) Parashat Shemot (14) Parashat Shoftim (2) Parashat Tazria (5) Parashat Terum

---

## avuka and ptil
https://www.balashon.com/2007/12/avuka-and-ptil.html

Friday, December 07, 2007 avuka and ptil Categories: Parashat Vayetze , Parashat Vayishlach It's clear by now that my indexing is taking much longer than I originally expected. And there have been a number of "distractions" that have come up during this time period. But I have received a few requests to continue to write even before the index is done. So just so you know that I continue to pay my electric bill (and that I'm still alive), I'll make sure to put up a regular post (although less frequently than before.) Although I've spent most of my time indexing books and websites that I've used in the past, I have come across some new material. Well, new to me anyway. An amazing book that I picked up a couple of weeks ago is Yad Halashon (1964) by Yitzhak Avinery, the linguist also well known as the author of Heichal Rashi . This 600+ page book has hundreds of articles that Avinery wrote over a course of decades. The English subtitle calls it a "lexicon of linguistic problems in the Hebrew language." I'm sure I'll refer to it regularly, as it provides an important bridge between the Ben Yehuda's dictionary and innovations and the modern Hebrew I speak in 2007. There are not a few entries about words that I've already written about - but it will probably take even longer for me to go back and review them. Anyway, on to today's post. In a 1949 article, Avinery makes a connection between two words: avukah אבוקה - "torch" and ptil פתיל - "wick, cord" (also ptila פתילה). The etymology of ptil is well known. It derives from the root פתל - "to twist, twine". It also means "to wrestle", and from here we get the origin of the name Naftali (see Bereshit 30:8). The origin of avuka is less clear. Klein says the origin is unclear. He is probably following Ben Yehuda, who writes that "the origin of the word is not clear, but perhaps it is a shortened form of אבהוקה avhuka , from the root בהק - "to shine, glow". However, there is an earlier etymology for avuka , as presented by the Ramban in his commentary to Bereshit 32:25 In this verse we find the root אבק as a verb: ו&#1463;י&#1468;&#1460;ו&#1468;&#1464;ת&#1461;ר י&#1463;ע&#1458;ק&#1465;ב, ל&#1456;ב&#1463;ד&#1468;ו&#1465;; ו&#1463;י&#1468;&#1461;א&#1464;ב&#1461;ק א&#1460;יש&#1473; ע&#1460;מ&#1468;ו&#1465;, ע&#1463;ד ע&#1458;לו&#1465;ת ה&#1463;ש&#1468;&#1473;&#1464;ח&#1463;ר "Yaakov was left alone; and a man wrestled with him until the break of dawn". It is clear that the word ויאבק means "he wrestled", but what is the etymology? Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi in Chullin 91a provides two different theories: וריב"ל אמר אמר קרא (בראשית לב) בהאבקו עמו כאדם שחובק את חבירו "Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: The Torah writes (Bereshit 32:26) 'as he wrestled בהאבקו with him' - as a person embraces - chovek חובק - his friend". אמר ר' יהושע ב"ל מלמד שהעלו אבק מרגלותם עד כסא הכבוד "Rabbi Yehoshua ben Levi says: this teaches us that the dust - avak אבק - of their feet went up to the Divine Throne." Each of these explanations finds 

---

## mozeg
https://www.balashon.com/2009/03/mozeg.html

Wednesday, March 18, 2009 mozeg Categories: food , pesach , Shir HaShirim With Pesach coming soon, I'd like to take a look at a word that appears in the very beginning of the Haggadah. Before Ha Lachma Anya , even before kiddush - there is the phrase: מוזגים כוס ראשון mozgim kos rishon . Generally translated as "pour the first cup", this might seem like a simple instruction, and not worthy of much notice. And in fact, none of the many hagadot that I checked discussed the word mozeg מוזג at all. But as we often see here, there's more to it than meets the eye. Let's start by looking at the word mozeg . While it does mean "pour" in modern Hebrew, that wasn't the original meaning of the word. It appears in Biblical Hebrew once - in the noun form mezeg מזג, in Shir HaShirim 7:3. Its sister form, מסך, appears a number of times - both as a verb masach (Yishayahu 5:22, 19:14, Tehilim 102:10, Mishlei 9:2,5) and as the nouns mesek (Tehilim 75:9) and mimsak ממסך (Yishayahu 65:11, Mishlei 23:30). What does it mean? It means "to mix", specifically to mix wine. Some of my readers will jump at the similarities between mezeg / mesek and the English word " mix " - or its Greek source misgein . As this scholar pointed out, the מ&#1464;ס&#1456;כ&#1464;ה י&#1461;ינ&#1464;ה&#1468; - mascha yeina of Mishlei 9:2 looks a lot like English and Latin: When Jerome must translate miscuit vinum , and the RSV "she has mixed her wine," we have an uncanny feeling that Latin and English are part of the same linguistic world as Hebrew. And there are those who do try to connect them. We've seen before that there seems to be a Greek connection to many of the words in Shir HaShirim , and Graetz thinks that mezeg might be a Greek borrowing as well. However, most scholars think that's not likely , and they don't even point to a possible earlier common root (as we saw with wine and yayin ). There are those that actually connect מזג / מסך to the Egyptian mdg/mtk . While mesek shows up more times than mezeg in the Tanach, in Rabbinic Hebrew, the verb mozeg is much more common. (The Even Shoshan dictionary strangely quotes the Mishna in Berachot 8:2 and Pesachim 10:2 as examples in their entry for מזג under the meaning "pour", when the Mishna clearly meant "mix". ) In fact in Avoda Zara 58b, we see that the rabbis noted this development: R. Assi asked R. Yochanan: How is it when wine is mixed ( masak ) by a heathen? &#8212; He said to him: Use the verb mazag ! [R. Assi] replied: I used the Scriptural word as in, "She has slain her sacrifice, she has mixed [ masekah ] her wine" (Mishlei 9:2). He said to him: The language of the Torah is distinct and so is the language of the Sages. The verb mozeg continues to mean "mix" in Medieval (and later) Hebrew as well. In fact, there's an interesting parallel between the English word " temper " and mezeg . Temper originally meant "to mix". From here we get temperament - the composition (mix) of one's personality, and mezeg had the same meaning in Jew

---

## chemah
https://www.balashon.com/2006/05/chemah.html

Wednesday, May 31, 2006 chemah Categories: food , Parashat Vayera In honor of Shavuot, lets look at a staple dairy food: chemah (or chem'ah ) - חמאה. In Modern Hebrew this always refers to butter, but in Biblical times that wasn't necessarily the case. In Bereshit 18:8, Avraham is going to serve chemah to his guests. Rabbi Aryeh Kaplan, in The Living Torah , translates chemah as "cottage cheese", and writes : Chemah in Hebrew, usually translated as curd. It is something that can be eaten alone; see Isaiah 7:15, 7:22; cf. Proverbs 30:33. Others interpret it to denote a kind of leben or yoghurt. According to Rashi, the word chemah denotes cream. (cf. Targum and Judges 5:25). The Septuagint, on the other hand, translates it as butter. Indeed, in Middle Eastern lands, it was the custom to eat butter alone. So we see a pretty wide range of dairy products as possible translations. Klein says that the word chemah is related to the Arabic hami'a - "it was turbid". According to this site : As the word chemah , here translated butter, signifies disturbed, agitated, probable that buttermilk is intended. The Arabs form their buttermilk by agitating the milk in a leathery bag This fits in well with the parallel given in Mishlei 30:33 - כ&#1468;&#1460;י מ&#1460;יץ ח&#1464;ל&#1464;ב, יו&#1465;צ&#1460;יא ח&#1462;מ&#1456;א&#1464;ה-- ו&#1468;מ&#1460;יץ-א&#1463;ף, יו&#1465;צ&#1460;יא ד&#1464;ם;ו&#1468;מ&#1460;יץ א&#1463;פ&#1468;&#1463;י&#1460;ם, יו&#1465;צ&#1460;יא ר&#1460;יב. "'The churning of milk brings forth butter, the wringing of the nose brings forth blood, and the forcing of anger brings forth strife" The connection of "turbid", "agitated", and "anger" may give us a clue to the origin of the word. It may be related to the Hebrew chema חמה - "anger". (There is also likely a connection between both חמה and חמאה and the word for heat - חום chom . When one is angry, he is "heated up". But it does not seem to be that chemah חמאה directly derives from "heat".) This gives an etymological connection to a strange association I have every year at Purim. When I hear Ester 3:5 -- ו&#1463;י&#1468;&#1460;מ&#1468;&#1464;ל&#1461;א ה&#1464;מ&#1464;ן, ח&#1461;מ&#1464;ה, I can't help thinking of Haman (maybe hamantaschen ?) filled with butter.... The Hebrew word for compliment - מחמאה machma'ah , derives from chemah . However, there's more to it than just a parallel to the English " butter up ". As this article explains, the word machma'ah was formed from a misreading of Tehillim 55:22 - ח&#1464;ל&#1456;קו&#1468;, מ&#1463;ח&#1456;מ&#1464;א&#1465;ת פ&#1468;&#1460;יו-- ו&#1468;ק&#1456;ר&#1464;ב-ל&#1460;ב&#1468;ו&#1465;:ר&#1463;כ&#1468;ו&#1468; ד&#1456;ב&#1464;ר&#1464;יו מ&#1460;ש&#1468;&#1473;&#1462;מ&#1462;ן; ו&#1456;ה&#1461;מ&#1468;&#1464;ה פ&#1456;ת&#1460;חו&#1465;ת. The translation of the verse should properly read "his talk was smoother than butter", which is parallel to the second half "his words were more soothing than oil". In this case, the mem in machmaot indicates "g

---

## pri
https://www.balashon.com/2011/01/pri.html

Thursday, January 20, 2011 pri Categories: food In honor of Tu B'Shvat, the Academy of the Hebrew Language posted a page about the Hebrew word for fruit: פרי - p'ri ( I prefer this spelling over pri , since it emphasizes the vocalized shva . We also find a few instances of peri - with a segol - in Biblical Hebrew.) They point out that in the Tanach, p'ri only appears as a collective noun (שם קיבוצי). This means that while it is in the singular form, it can refer to a group of more than one of the object. (See this page from Safa Ivrit, which gives many other examples of Biblical collective nouns. The question of whether a particular noun is a singular or a collective noun causes much debate among the commentators.) So the Biblical p'ri can either refer to an individual fruit or "fruit, produce" as a whole. In Rabbinic Hebrew we first find the plural perot פירות. They quote the Mishna (Berachot 6:1) as showing the mix of the two forms: על פ&#1468;&#1461;רות האילן הוא אומר: בורא פרי העץ. On fruits ( perot ) of the tree ( ilan ), he blesses " borei p'ri ha'etz " Although the rabbis spoke post-Biblical Hebrew, they generally used the Biblical forms of the word for the blessings. So here we have p'ri as the plural, as well as etz instead of ilan for "tree". The Academy also writes that p'ri is related to the verb פרה, meaning "to be fruitful". This is better than Klein who writes that p'ri comes from פרה. For as Tur Sinai writes in his footnote to פרה, the verb actually derives from the noun, since the noun has many cognates in Semitic languages, where the verb does not. Reader Shaul wrote to me: What is the etymology of peri ? Is it at all related to English "fruit," which ultimately derives from Latin "fructus" and Proto-Indo-European before that? The two words do not seem to be related. As the Online Etymology Dictionary (and others) point out, the Proto-Indo-European root is *bhrug , meaning "to enjoy", which is distant from p'ri meaning "fruit". However, there are other possible candidates for related English words. For example, in the comments on our post about tapuach תפוח , we discuss the possibility of the Latin pirum (the origin of the English word "pear"), being related to p'ri (it is also discussed in this old book ). Other English words possibly connected (although with plenty of theories to the contrary) include "berry", "bear" (as in bear fruit), and "fertile" (both from the PIE root *bher , which we've shown may be related to the Hebrew words apiryon אפריון and parnasa פרנסה .) See also this article , which tries to explain how many of these roots are connected, and also adds in the Hebrew יבול yevul , meaning "produce". But this is all just speculation. And as it's Tu B'Shvat - let's focus on the fruits of the Land of Israel! Tweet Pin It Posted by Balashon at 10:04 AM Email This BlogThis! Share to X Share to Facebook Share to Pinterest No comments: Post a Comment Newer Post Older Post Home Subscribe to: Post Comments (Atom) Search al