# Sources Batch 3
# 5 articles

## Jewish Languages: https://www.jewishlanguages.org/fun-facts

--> Fun Facts | Jewish Languages top of page Donate Mailing List Home About Contact Media Mailing list People Support Services Ancestry Mapping Captioning Consultation Translators and Researchers JLP in the News Consortium Languages Algerian Jewish Sign Language Ancient Judeo-Aramaic Judeo-Amazigh Judeo-Arabic Judeo-Catalan Jewish Dutch Jewish English Jewish Ethiopian Jewish French Judeo-French Judeo-Georgian Jewish German Judeo-Greek Haketia Hebrew Israeli Sign Language Jewish Hungarian Judeo-Iranian Judeo-Italian Jewish Latin American Spanish Jewish Malayalam Jewish Marathi Jewish Neo-Aramaic Jewish Papiamentu Judeo-Persian Judeo-Portuguese Judeo-Provençal Jewish Russian Judeo-Spanish/Judezmo/Ladino Jewish Swedish Judeo-Tajik / Bukharian Judeo-Tat / Juhuri Karaim Krymchak Yiddish (Eastern) Yiddish (Western) Events/Lectures Galleries High Holidays Sukkot Shabbat Liturgy Language Documentation Jewish Theater Children&#x27;s Literature Hanukkah Tu Bishvat Purim Passover Omer Shavuot Women&#x27;s Voices Tanakh Translation Learning Resources College Toolkit Curriculum Dictionaries FAQs Fun Facts Games Heirloom Heritage Words Heritage Words Podcast Maps Social Media Stats Transliteration Word of the Week Archive Music Mondays Shop Fun Facts Starting in the summer of 2021, the Jewish Language Project has presented Fun Facts - interesting insights about Jewish languages - on Facebook , Instagram , and Twitter , and on TikTok starting in 2022 and Threads in 2023. Read the posts below to learn about the existence of languages you&#39;ve never heard of, written texts from magic to newspapers, words from Hebrew and Aramaic, archaic pronunciations, and evidence of historical migrations and contact between Jewish communities. If you&#39;re looking for particular content, you can search the page for keywords using the ctrl+F function on a Windows computer or command+F function on an Apple computer. For future posts, we welcome suggestions from visitors like you. ​ In late 2022, we started an additional program: Jewish English Lexicon Word of the Week. See the archive here . 2026 January 5, 2026: Back to Basics! Week 1 1. What is a Jewish language anyway? 2. How do you make a language Jewish? 3. Are there, like, a lot of these? More than just Yiddish and Ladino? ​ Click each panel for more info. January 12, 2026: Back to Basics! Week 2 1. Where do Jewish languages come from? 2. Do people still speak these languages? 3. Are people working on revitalizing or documenting these languages? 4. Can non-scholars get involved? ​ Click each panel for more info. January 20, 2026: Back to Basics! Week 3 1. The Big Ones: Yiddish, Judeo-Spanish, and Judeo-Arabic 2. Yiddish: The Mameloshn 3. Judeo-Spanish: The Romantic 4. Judeo-Arabic: The Shape-Shifter ​ Click each panel for more info. January 27, 2026: Back to Basics! Week 4 1. International Holocaust Remembrance Day: Endangered Languages 2. What does it mean for a language to be endangered? 3. How does that happen? 4. Is this happening to Jewish languages? 5. Why does it matter? ​ Click each panel for more info. February 3, 2026: Jewish Black Language ​ Click each panel for more info. February 2026: Jewish Black Language ​ Westside Gravy, Michael Twitty, David Ben Yisrael Hakohen de Kolscritta March 31, 2026: Signing the Seder What is the Israeli Sign Language sign for the Passover Seder? It depends on the signer&#39;s ancestral background. ​ Mizrahi Jews, with origins in the Middle East, North Africa, and parts of Central Asia and the North Caucusus, use a sign that depicts waving the Seder plate above the head of each guest. For Ashkenazi Jews, with origins in Central and Eastern Europe, the sign depicts the tradition of dipping a pinky finger in wine and dropping a small amount on the place, a custom that symbolizes the ten plagues that befell the Egyptians. May 7, 2026: The Welsh Ulpan Welsh, like Hebrew, is a language that indigenous speakers have fought hard to revitalize. In the mid-1900s, Welsh

---

## LinguaLift: https://www.lingualift.com/blog/hebrew-language-history-facts/

Hebrew Language: History, Facts and Learning Tips &#x2d; Lingualift Twitter Facebook-f Instagram Login Sign Up Twitter Facebook-f Instagram Login Sign Up Get Weekly Language Tips That Work! Receive study tips, resources, weekly challenges, helpful articles and inspiring success stories. Many students use our weekly newsletter as an essential part of their study routine. Email This iframe contains the logic required to handle Ajax powered Gravity Forms. Hebrew Language: History, Facts and Learning Tips Hebrew is one of the world&#8217;s most ancient languages. It’s more than 3,000 years old, but it’s enjoying a second lease on life after its revival about 150 years ago. According to the 22nd edition of Ethnologue , 4,380,000 people speak Hebrew as their first language, while 3,950,000 use it as their second language. Worldwide, Hebrew has 9,303,950 speakers. Hebrew is one of the Bible&#8217;s languages and its revival still interests and fascinates many across the globe. Considering that Israel, a mostly Hebrew-speaking country is one of the most promising economies on earth, learning Hebrew will take you far if you are interested in translation or interpreting services as a career choice. Learning a new language improves your memory, gives your brain a boost, helps you communicate with more people and enhances your understanding of other cultures. Knowing Hebrew&#8217;s past, its path to revival and understanding Modern Hebrew will provide you with insight into the resilience of an ancient language. Hebrew&#8217;s Past The earliest available texts in Hebrew date from the second millennium BCE. The documents show that the Canaan invaders were Hebrew-speaking tribes from Israel. The common belief is that ancient Hebrew was the language of choice until 587 BCE when Jerusalem fell. Three eras divide Hebrew&#8217;s history: ● Classical or Biblical Hebrew – Until the third century BCE ● Rabbinic or Mishnaic Hebrew – Written records date from around 200 AD ● Medieval Hebrew – From the sixth to the thirteenth century AD ● Modern Hebrew – The current language spoken in Israel and learnt by Jews around the world Hebrew&#8217;s oldest form is in some of the poems in the Old Testament, such as the Song of Deborah . Some of the words used during that period came from different Canaanite languages, Sumerian and Akkadian. Aside from the Old Testament, several other texts from this period still exist. Rabbis of old even believed that Adam and Eve spoke Hebrew. According to Jewish folklore, people on earth were Hebrew speakers before the building of the Tower of Babel . When Jews were purged from Israel and dispersed in various settlements around the area and other countries, Hebrew as a spoken language started to disappear. Written Hebrew remained for holy texts and Jewish prayers. The decline of Hebrew as a spoken language went on from the 9th until the 18th century. Although spoken Hebrew remained stagnant, changes occurred in the written version, as liturgical writers added to the vocabulary, with new words and fresh meanings to existing ones. Moreover, at least 2,000 to 3,000 new words, created from old roots, were added to the philosophical, philological and scientific collection of terms. Hebrew&#8217;s Revival The later part of the 19th century was the start of Hebrew&#8217;s revival. It was fully established as a spoken language by 1948. Many scholars contributed to reviving Hebrew. The most notable one is Hebrew lexicographer, Eliezer Ben-Yehuda. He was one of those who added new words to the Hebrew dictionary. Ben-Yehuda was a Jewish nationalist, who believed that the best destiny for the Jewish people was returning to Israel, their homeland and have a revival of Israel&#8217;s language. Ben-Yehuda was born in Luzhky, Lithuania and received a religious education. When he was young, he already showed interest in Hebrew literature. Seeing the rise of nationalist movements in parts of Europe, he became more determined than ever to buil

---

## Unpacked: https://unpacked.media/hebrew-a-dead-language-revived/

Hebrew: A Dead Language Revived - Unpacked Skip to content Menu Latest Videos Podcasts Shop +More Latest Videos Podcasts Shop +More Join → Loading... Unpacking Israeli History Hebrew: A Dead Language Revived S1 E4 27mins If you’ve learned anything about the spread of Modern Hebrew, you probably heard that it’s all thanks to one man &#8211; Eliezer Ben Yehuda &#8211; that Israel’s national language is Hebrew and not Yiddish (or even German!). Not to spoil a good story with fact, but that’s not exactly how the rebirth of Hebrew went down. Far from being a crusade of one, it took an entire nation to revive a language that had been close to death for millennia. Subscribe to this podcast Episode Transcript Back in 2017, the NY Times published an article about Amadeo Garcia Garcia, the last living speaker of the Taushiro language. Once spoken for centuries by thousands of members of an Amazonian tribe, Amadeo was the sole survivor and the last person on earth to know the language. His tribe — which had lived uncontacted for centuries along the Amazonian river in Peru — slowly died out due to the weapons and diseases brought to them from intruders. When Amadeo’s brother passed away, his last remaining relative, a missionary, asked Amadeo how he felt. Amadeo responded in the broken Spanish that he had, the only way he had to communicate with the outside world. He said “it’s over now for us”. Why? Amadeo no longer had someone to speak to, and when you have no one else to speak to, you will lose your language. That’s why it was over for Amadeo. Losing a language is losing an identity, a culture, a history. I don’t mean to sound dramatic here, but losing a language is losing one&#8217;s self. Looking back at the history of the Jewish people, the Jews faced a very similar problem and the reality today is that over the last 150 years a modern miracle took place. For almost two thousand years, Hebrew — the language of the Torah, the Bible and so much Jewish liturgy &#8211; you know the prayers — was mostly reserved for the ritual. And now? Jews all over the world speak Hebrew, a language that was essentially dead as a spoken language. Something like this has never happened in the history of language, ever. The fact that the majority of Jews around the world speak Hebrew today is not something to take for granted. There are approximately 14.7M Jews in the world and 6.7M of them live in Israel, where Hebrew is the national language. And many hundreds of thousands outside of Israel speak it as well, learning it in Jewish day schools and in summer camps or at home. Sure, the Bible, prayers, and religious texts were written and read in Hebrew, but literally nobody spoke it in daily life for almost two thousand years. So how did an almost extinct Biblical language re-emerge as a spoken language in the span of only a few decades? Was it Zionism that deserves the credit? A certain figure named Eliezer Ben-Yehuda? And, was it always obvious that Hebrew would be the national language of the Jewish State? History of Hebrew Let’s jump back in time to learn about the history of the Hebrew language. Details about the spoken language of Hebrew in ancient times are not perfect. Here is what we know. In the Bible, the Jews, otherwise known as “Hebrews,” spoke an ancient — “biblical” version of Hebrew. Biblical Hebrew was the spoken language of the Jews for over 1,000 years. But when the Romans destroyed the second Jewish Temple in 70 CE, Hebrew began to die out. It was essentially completely dead 65 years later in 135, after the failure of the Bar Kokhba Revolt, when Roman emperor Hadrian expelled, enslaved, or killed most of Israel’s remaining Jews — the final native Hebrew speakers. The remaining Jews left in the Land of Israel continued using Hebrew in the study of the Torah, but they only used it as a written language. Even though Hebrew was zealously preserved, by the turn of the 2rd century, Aramaic had become the common language of the Middle East. A

---

## MustGo: https://www.mustgo.com/worldlanguages/hebrew/

Hebrew Language - Structure, Writing Alphabet - MustGo Toggle navigation Home Destinations Flights Hotels Languages Contact Us MustGo About World Languages Hebrew Hebrew Baruch haba, בָּרוּךְ הַבָּא – Welcome Hebrew (‘Ivrit, עִבְרִית ), or ‘Ivrit, is a member of the Semitic branch of the Afro-Asiatic language family . It is the language of the Hebrew Bible and of the Old Testament of the Christians. The core of the Hebrew Bible , the Torah , traditionally believed to have been first recorded in the time of Moses 3,300 years ago, is written in Classical Hebrew . Hebrew began to die out as a spoken language after the Jews were defeated by the Babylonians in 586 BC. Spoken Hebrew was replaced by Aramaic , although it was preserved as the language of religion, learning, and literature. Hebrew was revived as a spoken language during the late 19th and early 20th century as Modern Hebrew. It replaced Arabic , Yiddish , Russian , and a variety of other languages spoken by Jews who emigrated to Israel. Status Hebrew is spoken by about 5 million people in Israel ( Ethnologue ). This figure includes those who speak it as a a native language and those for whom it is a second language learned to varying degrees of proficiency. It became an official language of British Palestine in 1922. Today, it is the official language of the State of Israel. It is used for official, public and private purposes throughout Israel, wih the exception of the Arab sector, where Arabic is used. Government schools teach in either Hebrew or Arabic, however, Hebrew is a compulsory subject through the tenth grade in all schools, even the Arabic ones. Hebrew is the medium of instruction at the university level as well. It is the language of most newspapers, books, magazines, radio, and television. In addition,Hebrew remains the liturgical language of Jews worldwide. There are other surveys that place the number of Hebrew speakers worldwide at 9 million, but this figure does not indicate what is meant by “speakers”. Dialects Top There are two main dialects of Hebrew. The Europeanized dialect is spoken by Ashkenazi Jews of European descent. It is strongly influenced by Yiddish. Today, the Europeanized dialect enjoys greater social prestige and tends to be preferred by most young Israelis. The Oriental dialect is spoken by Sephardi Jews whose ancestors came to Israel from Middle Eastern countries. The name “Sephardic” comes from the Hebrew word Sefarad , ‘Spain’. These Jews lived in Spain and Portugal from the Middle Ages until their persecution and mass expulsion from those countries in the last decades of the 15th century when they fled to the Middle East. Oriental Hebrew is strongly influenced by Arabic. Although the Academy of the Hebrew Language attempts to establish standards, native speakers of Hebrew who now constitute a majority, have created a variety, Spoken Israeli Hebrew, that has yet to be systematically described and standardized. Structure Top Sound system Hebrew is unique in that it was resurrected from being a written language to becoming one that is spoken today as a first language by millions of people. Vowels Spoken Israeli Hebrew has six vowel phonemes , i.e., sounds that differentiate word meaning. The phonemes / e / and / ə / have merged in the speech of most Israeli speakers. In Biblical Hebrew, each vowel had three forms: short, long and interrupted, however this distinction has been lost in Modern Hebrew. The term “interrupted vowel” refers to a vowel followed by a glottal stop . Front Central Back Close i u Mid e ə o Open a /ə/ = sound between syllables in uh-uh Consonants Consonants in Biblical Hebrew had several characteristics that are not present in Modern Hebrew, for example: gemination, i.e., doubling of consonants; spirantization, i.e., pronouncing a stop , as a fricative , e.g., pronouncing /b / as a /v/ ; pharyngealization, i.e., pronouncing consonants with constricted vocal cords; loss of voiceless and voiced pharyngeal consonants

---

## MyJewishLearning: https://www.myjewishlearning.com/article/eliezer-ben-yehuda/

Eliezer Ben-Yehuda and the Making of Modern Hebrew | My Jewish Learning Skip to Search Skip to Content Skip to Footer Donate Newsletter My Jewish Learning The Hub Daf Yomi Say Kaddish Search Submit Celebrate Visit Celebrate Jewish Calendar Shabbat Rosh Hashanah Yom Kippur Sukkot Shemini Atzeret/Simchat Torah Hanukkah Purim Passover Shavuot More Holidays Eat Visit Eat Jewish Recipes Food Videos The Nosher Holiday Food Keeping Kosher Challah Recipes Study Visit Study Daf Yomi Weekly Torah Email Mini-Courses Beliefs Practices Jewish Texts Jewish History Jewish Culture Hebrew Holocaust Israel FAQ Live Visit Live Birth Bar/Bat Mitzvah Weddings Marriage Conversion Interfaith Divorce Denominations Health Wellness Women Feminism Gender Sexuality Blogs Español Mourn Visit Mourn End of Life Sitting Shiva Mourner&#8217;s Kaddish Mourning Rituals Mourning Timeline Afterlife Grief Email Series Podcast: End of Life Pray Visit Pray Prayer Email Shema Prayer for the Sick Shabbat Prayers High Holidays Holiday Prayers Blessings for Food Traveler&#8217;s Prayer Classes The Hub Daf Yomi Say Kaddish Newsletter Donate Trending Topics: Food Creators Bootcamp The Reshaping of America History of the Blood Libel Israel History Eliezer Ben-Yehuda and the Making of Modern Hebrew The Lithuania-born visionary turned an ancient language into a spoken one. By David Saiger Advertisement Share Share on Facebook facebook Share on Twitter Share on Pinterest Print Page You might also like How to Learn Hebrew Hebrew Jewish Immigration to Pre-State Israel Israel History When Eliezer Ben-Yehuda arrived in Palestine in 1881, Hebrew had not been the spoken language of the Jewish people since the time of the Bible . Yet, thanks to Ben-Yehuda, by 1922 enough Jewish pioneers were speaking Hebrew that the British Mandate authorities recognized it as the official language of Jews in Palestine. Ben-Yehuda conceived of Jewish nationalism as both the return to the historical homeland in the land of Israel , as well as the revival of the Hebrew language. To accomplish the latter, Ben-Yehuda needed to inspire a near impossible feat: transform Hebrew, which for centuries had been used only in study, into a modern spoken language. A Youthful Yearning Eliezer Ben-Yehuda was born Eliezer Perelman in Luzhky, Lithuania, in 1858. The son of a Chabad Hasid , Ben-Yehuda was given a traditional religious education at a local yeshiva. The rosh yeshiva , or head of the school, was secretly a maskil , or enlightened thinker. He introduced Ben-Yehuda to secular literature and piqued the boy s interest in non-religious study. Eventually Ben-Yehuda transferred to a Russian school, but he remained obsessed with modern Hebrew literature, eagerly consuming Hebrew periodicals, especially those concerned with Jewish nationalism. For Ben-Yehuda, nationalism became a way to embrace Hebrew without religion. Help us keep Jewish knowledge accessible to millions of people around the world. With your help, My Jewish Learning can provide endless opportunities for learning, connection and discovery. One-time Monthly Choose an amount to donate $72 $180 $360 $500 $ Support Us Ben-Yehuda found further inspiration in European nationalist movements. In the 19th century, Italy and Greece both countries with ties to ancient lands and languages became independent nations. In 1877, the year of Ben-Yehuda s graduation from high school, the Russo-Turkish war began and brought prominence to the Bulgarian national movement that sought independence from the Ottomans. Envisioning the Jews as a nation akin to the Bulgarians, Greeks, and Italians, Ben-Yehuda became determined to help create a nation where the Jews could adopt Hebrew as their national language. Soon after, Ben-Yehuda learned that Jewish communities were using Hebrew to communicate when other languages wouldn t suffice. (Historians now know that this phenomenon had existed since the Middle Ages in Europe and the Near East.) In Jerusalem, for example, Jews spo